# getting github pages to work the way I want it to

Moving my website to GitHub Pages has taken a little more effort than I originally
thought it would due to a lack of control over how things get delivered and a few
specific bugs that popped up here and there from trying to get a ton of stuff to
work together.

## obfuscation, minimization, and other preprocessing related things

Naturally, I want to have all my code obfuscated, files minimized, and some other
things done to what users will end up receiving when visiting the website. The problem
here is that GitHub Pages only servers static sites so these files will have to
exist on their own within the repository that is being served.

Another issue comes from the fact that I ended up using the user site i.e.
<username>.github.io instead of another one, so I [couldn't choose a specific publishing
source outside of master](https://docs.github.com/en/github/working-with-github-pages/about-github-pages#publishing-sources-for-github-pages-sites).
This means I had to have just the processed files exist on the master branch and
nothing else or else risk them being found through url enumeration or something.

### preprocessing

I was able to set up a separate branch with the files in their unadulterated form
and use GitHub Actions along with a few custom scripts to build and update master
with the resulting files. The files are processed to complete the following tasks:

### serving scripts as images

This is a ~~exploit~~ trick I learned a long time ago which I thought was pretty
cool - due to the nature of various image formats, they are perfectly valid
when run as javascript. If you want to see an example, the script that loads the
background effect is [this one](/scripts/playful_reimu.bmp).

It's important to first note that certain browsers will block these kinds of things,
as I used to load the script with

```javascript
document.head.appendChild(document.createElement('script')).src = '/image_script.bmp'
```

but slightly modified in such a way that it might look like it's loading an image
at first glance.

Depending on the MIME type, this may be blocked. If we look at the [Firefox source](https://hg.mozilla.org/mozilla-central/file/57284968eab1434aeb7a435082f0a7b59add13af/netwerk/protocol/http/nsHttpChannel.cpp#l1548)
we can see that if the MIME type starts with certain things, they will be blocked,
but further down we can also see that sometimes unmatching MIME types are allowed
through with a warning. One more thing is that I wanted to have the image displayed
when users visit the url which means it still needs to have some kind of MIME type
that hints that it is an image. I was able to get around this by just setting the
`Content-Type` as `image` - hey, it doesn't start with `image/` so it works!
(disclaimer: untested on other browsers)

(Actually this behavior might have changed between the initial date of writing and
now. An updated version of that file can be found [here](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/source/netwerk/protocol/http/nsHttpChannel.cpp#1675-1707))

Unfortunately, for GitHub Pages, you don't have control over these things. I was able
to remove the .bmp extension and have the MIME type be `application/octet-stream`
which loaded nicely but then would not display an image when visiting the url. I
could also keep the `.bmp` extension but run into the problems mentioned above.

I ended up just using fetch/xhr to load the script contents and eval to load it...
This is probably when someone tells me about the security concerns of doing this

Also if you're interested, here's [the package](https://github.com/rei2hu/js-bmp-packer)
I made and use to combine images and code. Unfortunately I never got around to
writing one for other image formats because bmps served the purpose fine for me.

### minification and obfuscation and rip-off templating

I guess technically the above technique also falls under obfuscation since there
is a ton of image data that you'll find when looking at the scripts, but who knows.
As part of the build process, I run minifiers/obfuscators on the files. There's nothing
very complicated about this especially since I ended up using packages to do all
the work so I'll skip over this.

One thing I have setup is that all of these posts are actually markdown files which
are then converted to html and inserted into a template which contains the head contents.
The template is literally just a string for which I just `String#replace` to insert
the converted markdown. The funniest issue is that I have set up the html with MathJax
and the markdown to have display math indicators be $$. And it just so happens that
using `String#replace(string, string)` has a special interpretation of $$, which
changed those to $, ruining the layout. That was quickly fixed by using
`String#replace(string, Function)` but damn was that funny how it popped up.

### workflow idea

1. Checkout master branch
2. Checkout internal branch
3. Build site with scripts in internal branch directory
    1. Script to package javascript and images
    2. Script to convert markdown to html
    3. Script to minify css
    4. Script to minify html
4. Copy folder with built contents into master directory
5. Commit and push

### credit to packages

I just want to credit the packages that I am taking advantage of for this stuff
(copied from package.json):

- "clean-css": "^4.2.3"
- "html-minifier": "^4.0.0"
- "javascript-obfuscator": "^1.3.0"
- "js-bmp-packer": "git+<https://github.com/rei2hu/js-bmp-packer.git>"
- "showdown": "^1.9.1"
- "uglify-es": "^3.3.9"

#### local testing

Specifically because I have the ability to build stuff locally such that the entire
website is stored in a single directory, I was able to use http-server to quickly
test everything. That's in the dev dependencies.

- "http-server": "^0.12.3"

#### other things

I am also taking advantage of highlightjs and MathJax (well not this one yet) for
other display reasons.

## closing

Looking at these scripts... hmm yeah I think I'm going to regret making them the
way they are right now. Either I will have to clean them up quickly or I will question
my past self. Maybe not. Ideally I don't have to touch them... haha
