# gaming the system

For my 100th post, I'll write on the topic that I've been half-thinking about
for years. It's important to me, but, like always, I'll be writing a stream of
thoughts instead of drafting something. I hope it comes out well articulated.

A while back, I was considering buying an e ink tablet. I found a few products
within my price range which boasted similar capabilities, and I was not sure
which one to pick. What did I do? The same as probably anyone - I looked through
the reviews, paying special attention to any negative ones. After a few days of
research, I decided to buy one based on what I read. It turned out to be
terrible.

When it comes to evaluating things, we often look for signals that something may
be good or not. In this case, I read product reviews to source opinions about a
tablet from people who have already purchased one. Perhaps this was an effective
approach 5 or 10 years ago, but, since then, fake and/or sponsored reviews have
greatly diminished their usefulness in judging products.

I honestly believe this concept of manipulating signals for individual gain is
one of the largest causes of bad stuff today. Wow I really said bad stuff
because I couldn't think of a better word. Let's take a look at several
examples:

Years ago, Google (the search engine, not the company) provided useful, relevant
results to users queries. Nowadays, the top results of many searches are still
relevant in some sense, but are not what users are looking for. This is due to
SEO (search engine optimization). When evaluating websites, Google Search uses
several criteria to figure out how useful it could be. Whatever the criteria is,
it is possible to manipulate in some fashion, but why would anyone do that?
Well, after a certain period of time, people realized that being a top result on
Google could be lucrative and looked for ways to game the system and put
themselves on top. Of course, the evaluations evolve now and then which kick
less useful results back down, but SEO techniques evolve alongside them.

This focus on metric optimization is also one of the driving forces behind
"enshittification". Online products typically start out and grow because the
initial success metrics rely on user traction, which is gained by providing a
good service. Later in the life cycle, the focus shifts to revenue at the cost
of previously acquired value e.g. user goodwill.

This behavior is also present within social systems from an early age and can
actually be counterproductive to groups and society as a whole.

Schools evaluate potential students based on their grades, extracurriculars,
test scores, and other criteria. Ideally good grades suggests that individuals
are studious, extracurriculars suggest some discipline to pursue outside
interests, and test scores suggest aptitude. But good grades could be the result
of cheating, extracurriculars the result of outside pressure, and test scores a
result of specific, targeted preparation. Instead of a student who actually
embodies desirable traits, you have one who instead exhibits them but inwardly
follow others.

The same can be said for the job application process. A resume should give an
overview of an individual's skills and expertise, but a common practice is to
embellish stories for your own benefit or even outright lie. There are also
recommendations, which should suggest that someone already at a company is
familiar with your skills; what I see often now is strangers looking for
introductions and recommendations from each other as another way to obtain an
interview. And then for the interview... there are entire interview preparation
industries, similar to test preparation industries. So even after the entire
process, you may end up with someone who is woefully unqualified.

The only responses I've seen to combat this in social systems is to either drop
specific evaluations, or to raise the bar of what's already expected which,
ironically, makes it even harder to do things honestly.

I would like to point to the technology sector as a great example of this. Over
a decade ago, there were strong signals to identify skilled individuals - things
like having a published code online or contributing to open source. These things
by themselves are not useful, but would be the result of someone with interest
in the trade. Fast forward a few years and advice like "have a GitHub" and
"contribute to open source" goes around; not because you want to do it, but
because it's one of those signals that suggests something positive about you.
There's so much box checking and posing because it's a lucrative industry and
the rewards are good if you can fake it to make it.

And many have.

Another overarching concept in the idea of quantity over quality - because
evaluating quality is effortful, we many instead look at quantity. Some
researchers focus on getting out as many papers as they can and receiving as
many citations as they can. There's at least one marketer-turned-developer who
prides themselves on having thousands of open source projects which are just
small utilities that are dependencies of each other.

This abuse the system and fake it until you make it theme has been growing for a
while and has been depressing to me. It's been able to go on during the
prosperous times as the unqualified could still succeed and rise, but once
the belt buckle tightened, things start to fall apart. What we'll see are people
copying each others actions, much more fallout from doing that, and a lot of
shortsighted decision-making.

But I won't lie, I've also succumbed a bit to it myself. Some tiny piece of the
reason I'm writing is that it's a signal. Some tiny piece of the reason I'm
working towards a master's degree is the signal.

Well, I finally wrote it. I guess it came out decently, though I did think it
would be a much longer rant. It fits on 100 lines, though which is perfect for
post 100.
