# an observation of virtual avatars

I did _not_ want to put vtuber in my title.

I had some free time this weekend and had nothing to do so I decided to look for
something. I realized that Hades 2 was released and decided to watch someone
playing it.

When I was looking through various streams, the main thing I noticed was the
prevalence of vtubers. Is it correct to call them vtubers despite them not being
on youtube, as the [wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VTuber)
says it's short for virtual youtuber? I was familiar with the popularity of
several vtubers through memes but I didn't realize that everyone and their dog
was using them.

It made me think of how I saw a similar shift from using any random thing for
your avatar or profile picture to anime/cartoony related things on forums,
though now I question if it was an actual shift or if it was due to whatever
circles I hung around back then.

Either way, I find the rise of vtubers to be somewhat similar, and possibly
related to the rise in popularity of japanese media in general.

And honestly it's kind of weird. It might be the "boomer" mentality of not
understanding the next generation, but actually watching (these specific kinds
of) virtual avatars do normal people things just feels uncanny. It could just be
related to the quality of motion capture, but I can't really say.

There's also some discourse on how vtubers are predatory, though I don't
necessarily see a difference between that and other personality/looks based
marketing (which I think is the same kind of predatory). It does lower the
barrier to entry for others, though, which is both good and bad.

At the end of the day I watched a streamer that had no avatar and no camera play
Hades 2 and it was chill and later read the game's story online elsewhere.
