# hypothesize, implement, test

I was thinking of how to categorize the kind of work I'm interested in recently
and came up with a generalization:

1. hypothesize
2. implement
3. test
4. back to 1

At its core, it sounds a lot like the scientific method, and I guess that makes
sense because the core reason is to learn things or figure things out.

How does this relate to work responsibilities?

As a developer, when I talk about how I would like feature development to go, I
typically say I want to garner feedback or know the impact of the feature when
it's released. These two things are a mix of test and hypothesize.

This brings me to the other kind of work I would like to do, which I can only
call "deep tech", though I would also include work that's shallower than what's
[described on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_tech). Being able to
work on that would also be preferable, as there is a focus on research and
development, which seems to be another name for what I'm interested in.

When it comes to product work, most places will delegate the hypothesize and
test steps to people like product managers, which is unfortunate for people like
me. You could argue that there are hypothesize and test steps inside of
implementation itself, but that depends on how complex or open the feature
itself is. For normal full stack development, there honestly is not much
complexity - there are a handful of patterns to follow that can satisfy whatever
you plan to do most of the time, and adding complexity is unnecessary and
possibly detrimental in the long run.

Deep tech... well it's out there, but the requirements for jobs that involve it
are a lot more strict. And I've more or less been doing product development for
my entire career so I'm afraid I've been pigeonholed into doing this for the
rest. Of course, I'll keep trying to break into it whenever I find a job
application whose requirements I mostly satisfy as it has the best long term
prospects for matching my interests.
