# thoughts on space related data structures

Yesterday, a discussion I was in somehow turned towards quadtrees and their use.
Eventually, someone mentioned that spatial hashes and BVH (bounding volume
hierarchies) were more common now.

The first random insight I had was related to trees. Why are quadtrees used for
2d applications while octotrees are used for 3d? Visually, you can see that the
spaces break down recursively into 4 or 8 subspaces, but why is that?

This is because of the number of axes - 2 and 3; the data structures are
basically doing a binary partition of each axis in space, which means trees will
have $2^d$ children when used to represent areas with $d$ dimensions.

In fact, this is applicable to 1d too if you look at something like a sorted
list, where we use binary trees (or at least could use binary trees
conceptually).

And for higher dimensions? Well, I guess it means you can somehow partition it
into 16 spaces and use a 16 tree but that's probably hard to visualize (at least
I can't).

While I'm not familiar with BVH, a quick look over the description makes it
sound like a similar idea but with arbitrary partitions instead of binary ones.
Spatial hashing does something similar; picking a hash based on what
partition(s) objects fall into, though the partitions at every level can also be
customized in this case.

All of the ideas are very similar - grouping objects in space depending on their
proximity to one another, and using the grouping to be able to figure out
proximity later on.
