# how NOT to handle no-javascript environments

I run [noscript](https://noscript.net/), which blocks javascript from running on
websites and I enable scripts only if a site is interesting/useful enough to
warrant enabling it. One benefit of this is that I can selectively choose what
scripts to enable, and can avoid loading external ones, avoiding issues like
[this](https://sansec.io/research/polyfill-supply-chain-attack) (though that one
technically only targeted mobile devices and it's possible a site wouldn't
normally work without polyfill support...) I do set a pretty low bar when
deciding when to start enabling scripts, so it's kind of whatever.

On a side note it's kind of sad how many blank pages I get nowadays.

Recently, I opened a [Notion](https://www.notion.so/) link, and it took me to
[https://www.notion.so/disabled-javascript.html](https://www.notion.so/disabled-javascript.html).
I don't use Notion for my personal stuff, so I had not encountered outside of
work environments where I do not have noscript.

How did it do that? Well, if you look at the source you'll find

```html
<noscript>
	<meta
		http-equiv="refresh"
		content="0; url=https://www.notion.so/disabled-javascript.html"
	/>
</noscript>
```

Pretty cool, right? Well there's an annoying issue with that. Take a look at the
[standard](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/semantics.html#shared-declarative-refresh-steps)
around `http-equiv="refresh"`, specifically the part that says

> then navigate document's node navigable to urlRecord using document, with
> historyHandling set to "replace".

It replaces last entry on the history stack instead of pushing a new one on,
which means the original page is gone. If I enable scripts, then I'm left on the
disabled-javascript page. If I press back, I'm on the page before the one I'm
looking for - I have to grab the link again.

I wonder who came up with the idea to do it this way. With component frameworks
nowadays, shouldn't it be simple to embed the disabled javascript content into
each page itself? There's not much, though I guess it's not important because
not many people disable javascript and sending something unnecessary 99% of the
time with all requests is a waste of bandwidth.

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
	<head>
		<meta charset="utf-8" />
		<title>Notion</title>
		<style type="text/css">
			/* ... */
		</style>
	</head>
	<body>
		<div class="main">
			<img
				alt="Notion"
				style="width: 40px; margin: 0 auto; display: block"
				src="data:image/png;base64..."
			/>
			<p>
				JavaScript must be enabled in order to use Notion.<br />
				Please enable JavaScript to continue.
			</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
```

There's also the other question of why javascript is necessary to display what
is usually mostly text data. Yes, there are specific interactive parts of the
page that would require javascript but you could use similar `noscript` tags to
tell users to enable it, but that runs into the efficiency issue again.
