# grad school semester 2 end

No halfway post this time; I guess that's because there was nothing worth
writing about (that's not exactly true, and I'll go into why later)

## Programming Languages & Compilers

Fun little course that is done in Haskell - my previous experience and general
skill with functional programming made this aspect a nonissue.

The actual content was similar to pl+c courses I took in undergrad; parsing and
interpreting a language. In fact, I would say you could remove the +c part
because there was no compiler part for this course, unfortunately. Well, in
undergrad this was also two courses "programming languages" and "compilers" so I
guess this is just the first course.

It was nice to review the topics, as it's one of my "liked" subjects (enough
such that I have a few contributions in some places). Even just having previous
exposure to the topic meant none of what was covered here is really new. This
should be an A or an A+ depending on curves, if any.

## Data Cleaning

Probably not a good course by most standards, but somewhat decent. The course
covers a lot of tools for data cleaning and profiling - some that I've see
before like sqlite and others I have heard of but never used like logica and
prolog - and is pretty practical while also including a lot of semi-up-to-date
readings on published papers.

The core part of the class is implementing an (extract, transform, load) ETL
pipeline with emphasis on the transform (cleaning) part to support a specific
use case. I had not done anything like this before and thought it was a
relatively interesting project, mainly due to novelty. It was time consuming but
more or less straightforward.

In terms of grades, I think the grading is quite naive. The ETL pipeline was 90%
of the class but only accounted for maybe 20% of the grade, with the rest of the
grade going towards some smaller homework and quizzes on the covered tools and
topics. There was also extra credit which could be done to boost the overall
grade by 8-9%. Yeah I did it. If I'm not getting over a 100% in this class then
I don't know what to say. That's an A+ right?

## Scientific Visualization

A very good course in my opinion. Probably not useful in whatever future day to
day work I do (like most of my undergrad classes at the moment??) but covers
relatively complex (or new) topics like:

- Reflection models
- Mesh generation
- Ray tracing
- Vector fields
- Contouring
- Convolutions
- Image segmentation
- Graph layouts

Honestly, I took it because I though it would be graphics related, and it was
that and so much more. Several of the covered topics were accompanied with solid
projects which was an important part of the content - implementations and
examples in practice.

This is definitely the class that covered things I feel are worth writing about,
but I didn't because I've been in a slump honestly. I plan to put some things
together eventually (or just say I do and forget about it).

One notable thing about this class was the midterm; it was probably one of the
most intense exams I've ever taken, and is probably one of the only times I've
worked on an exam to the time limit (1 hour in this case). There was so much
math to do, and I ended up doing it by hand. I believe other students put
together scripts to run calculations ahead of time and there still seemed to be
time trouble. The mean/median was in the low 70s, and I got something in the mid
80s (though I think due to a bug in some software it should be in the low 90s,
but I'm not going to contest that).

I was apprehensive about the final but it was simpler and I only took half of
the time, coming out with a low 90 (due to some mistakes I made doing hand
calculations). Why didn't I put together scripts again? Oh well, I don't think
it affects the final letter grade, though if I argued for every single point it
could be the difference between an A and A+ but I don't care about that.

Combining those exam scores with everything else, this should be an A or around
a 96. I don't think that's A+ range but we'll see if there's a curve.

As expected, 2 A+s and an A. I imagine it's quite difficult to get an A+ in
scientific visualization without good prior knowledge or dedicating a solid
amount of time to the subject - the cutoff was 99 and could only be obtained by
getting between one and two questions wrong in total for exams and 100ing
everything else.

No big deal, I'm not a perfectionist.

## ProctorU

pl+c required ProctorU for exams and this was my first experience with it. I'll
admit I was somewhat afraid considering all of the discourse I've read about it
before, from technical implementation to privacy, but it was a pretty smooth
experience for me.

The process was:

1. Download their browser
2. Download their support/chat tool
3. Run through some privacy invasive steps (take pictures of environment, share
   photo ID)
4. Take exam
5. Fin

The only hiccup that I would run into is that I had to share my ID twice each
time because the first automated thing isn't clear or something, and that's
quite concerning. But I've read that the ID information is deleted within one or
two weeks so that should be somewhat safe.

Exams were scheduled for one hour but I took at most 20 minutes each time, with
10 of those minutes being used up due to step 3. I'll also say I don't think it
would be very hard to cheat despite the checks - I did not cheat, but as I did
the dance I thought of several holes that could be exploited.

## fall semester

For this semester I'm taking security and distributed systems. I may have prior
experience in security depending on what's covered and distributed systems is
probably entirely new, though I suspect there are a lot of _parallels_ with HPC.
Good pun.
