# review of my haskell project

I think I'm more or less finished with my game, and here is the review:

The programming of the game was a good way to learn the basics of developing with
Haskell. I've (re)learned how to use various tools while working with the language
including `stack`, `hlint`, and `brittany` (mainly because I'm too lazy to follow
a consistent style when programming so if I can hit one or two keys to format my
code, I'm a happy person).

Furthermore, I was able to use several libraries and learn how to read documentation
for Haskell projects. Mainly I used `containers` for a hash table and `gloss` for
graphics. I also got some good experience using `hoogle` to look for functions.

However, there were also some problems with this project. First I'll start with
some generic things:

1. I had a hard time organizing my code
    - Basically I started out with a few top level files just so I could get things
    rolling quickly, then moved them to their respective folders later. However,
    as I found the need to make more files, I was not sure if the current structure
    was good.

2. I did not have a clear idea of the game
    - When I first started writing the game, all I had in mind was colors and a
    board with hexagonal tiles. I basically came up with the rest of the mechanics
    while writing which could have contributed to my problems in point 1.

Now for Haskell specific things, I think that the game was just too simple to allow
me the opportunity to implement instances for typeclasses. Only once did I implement
`Functor` only to realize that it was unnecessary one or two days later. Oh also
I didn't test it, although I do have some previous things Haskell things which include
tests.

If I had to rate the effectiveness of this experience, I would give it a 6/10.
However, it may be possible to fill in the missing gaps without doing another project;
looking at already existing Haskell code could give good insight for these things.
Also I'm most definitely missing a lot of other stuff that I'm unaware of because
I've only just touched the surface of the language.

Now bringing it all back to entry 2: Why learn Haskell? So far I cannot think of
many new reasons outside of the previously given:

1. Functional
    - Being exposed to different programming paradigms is most likely very valuable
    as it gives a broader view of computer science/programming as a whole
2. No boilerplate
    - If you are aware of at least some of the language constructs, you can cut down
    on a lot of code that you would have to write using other languages
3. Statically typed
    - I didn't have to worry about too many runtime errors because the compiler would
    either error out or complain
4. ~~Sound smart~~Review/learn concepts
    - That was a joke point originally but Haskell seems to place more emphasis on
    various concepts that imperative programming languages barely touch - monads,
    type inference, lazy eval - granted this is common in most, if not all,
    functional languages.
