# backend tikzpicture generation

In my previous article, I leveraged the ability to create tikzpicture diagrams
on the frontend a lot. It's a cool feature, but there are quite a number of
layout shifts which should be avoided due to disorientation.

![images replacing text causing page to jump](/blobs/111/shift.gif)

To think that the work that I did for [106](/posts/106) would be replaced so
quickly... Actually, doing all the legwork in 106 made this transition pretty
easy since I was already familiar with the internal workings.

So what had to be changed? Virtually nothing. Why?

1. I already did the work to separate dom manipulation from tikzpicture
   generation so I could customize the dom stuff to work with workers. Now I
   just replaced the "dom stuff" with stuff to integrate with my existing build
   scripts.
2. The node.js WebAssembly api is the same between node.js and browser so no
   changes had to be made there.
3. The original client module is some webpacked javascript, and the original
   source ran almost flawlessly in node as mjs files. Though I did rewrite the
   main file in cjs so I wouldn't have to deal with dynamic imports in my
   already existing cjs centric build scripts.

    Technically that's a lie, because once you have async code deep down (the
    unavoidable dynamic import), it's going to infect everything above it. This
    caused a small issue because I normally use Showdown.js's extension system
    to process custom content but Showdown doesn't allow processors (functions)
    to be asynchronous. So, I just stuck it after the entire Showdown step in
    the pipeline and it works.

Really, it's a nice self contained bit of code once you figure out how it and
its dependencies are built; looking at the source for this website (the actual
prebuilt source) can show how. And this is better than just having external
images, because I get to keep the source of the tikz diagram directly in posts
which allows easy edits and allows my janky post git history features to keep
track of changes.

An example of knowing what's in place is having to set up TeX locally (which I
have) and also setting it up in the Github Actions container (which I did lazily
by having it download `texlive-binaries` each run). This is needed for
`kpsewhich` which is require for `dvi2html`. Arguably one could package the
information in manually but that's a bit more work.

Also there is one hiccup in regards to the "self contained bit of code". There
is basically a mock in-memory file system that's used with the code and it's not
async safe, so I just put a bootleg lock over the methods that rely on it e.g.

```js
let lock = Promise.resolve();

function do(work) {
	const myWork = lock.then(work);
	lock = myWork;
	return myWork;
	// return lock = lock.then(work) // ???
}
```

I think it works, since it's just promise chaining but I'm not 100% sure about
that. It lets things build without running into an unreadable wasm error though
so that must mean it's working.

This also removed around 1mb of compressed data that was being loaded for each
page, whether or not it had tikz diagrams on it or not (because all content is
inserted into some template html which comes with the same set of script tags).
While Github Pages does suggest that the browser caches things through cache
control/max age headers, it's a fixed value of some minutes which is pretty low
for those files (tex memory dump, wasm, and glue) since they will rarely, if
ever, be updated. They're entirely gone now, though.

Interestingly enough, this is the second thing I've moved from client-side
javascript, the first thing being code block handling (expand/collapse and
syntax highlighting). The only real thing left is MathJax, which is around 50%
of the data - excluding media like images and videos that may vary between
posts - that is transferred for viewing a post. Will I also move that over to
the backend? Only if I think it's ruining ux, which I would say it doesn't.
Anyways, I believe the backend implementation will insert mathml tags which, if
I remember correctly, are very ignored by the big browser players so it might
not be a good idea.
