# grad school semester 3 midpoint

The last time I decided to write something about the semester was a few weeks
after midterms, but this time I'm deciding to write a post in the middle.

Why? To vent.

So in my last grad school related post, I mentioned I'm taking two classes,
computer security and distributed systems. There is a new professor teaching
computer security - and I mean entirely new like first time as an (associate)
professor.

The class's content is nice - a bunch of high level computer security topics and
real life examples like social network privacy, adversarial machine learning,
and cryptography in addition to various open ended projects touching on them -
but the midterm...

I'll start with the good parts:

- It was a take home exam
- It was open book
- There was a specific 24 hour window to submit the exam with no time limit
    otherwise

And the bad:

- The 24 hour window was on a weekday, announced a week in advance. This meant
    I could not take a day off to work on it, so I just tackled it after work
    hours.a
- Most of the questions asked about things not covered in the course.

I'd like to expand on the second point, which is what probably screwed me over.
The professor believed that people would use external resources and decided that
putting a bunch of stuff that was not covered was fair. Honestly, the first part
is reasonable but the second part is...

I thought open book meant open notes and did not use any extra resources outside
of notes and slides (pdfs of the lecture material presentation).

A choice quote from the professor about the exam:

> Given the proliferation of generative AI, and the absence of proctoring a lot
> of the elements of the class, I find it hard to believe that people are doing
> work without any additional assistance. While I can technically "ban" the
> usage of search/generative AI, I am not in a position to verify if this ban
> was enforced by the students. Consequently, the only way I can ensure that
> people invest time and effort into studying is by having a proctored final
> exam with a large fraction of the grade (which is probably the only item in
> the class that reliably tests your understanding of the material).

An actual question that I remember, because I happened to (maybe) know the
answer by luck was:

> What's a key exchange algorithm that offers perfect forward secrecy (concept
> not covered in class) and post compromise security (concept not covered in
> class)?
>
> a. IKE (not covered in class)
>
> b. Double Ratchet Algorithm (not covered in class)
>
> c. RSA key exchange (not covered in class, though general RSA algorithm was)
>
> d. ??? (forgot what the option was, also not covered in class)

Assuming you don't have any outside information, how is this possible to answer
correctly? By luck. Well, at least for this one, I've heard of Double Ratchet
and was semi familiar with its characteristics so I think that it was the answer
(answers have yet to be released).

There were like two questions that were more or less logical:

> A hard fork in a cryptocurrency is... A soft fork is... X, Y, and Z happen.
> This is an example of...
>
> (covered cryptocurrencies, but did not cover specific examples of forking
> outside of "if two people disagree then a fork is made and the longer chain
> wins" with a bit more detail than that)
>
> a. A hard fork followed by a soft fork
>
> b. A soft fork
>
> c. A hard fork
>
> d. None of the above

I mean, I assume I should be able to answer the question properly without any
external information since it's like a reading comprehension thing (but who
knows?)

Anyways, with like maybe 3/4s of the questions on the midterm using uncovered
material, there's not much to wonder about why I did so poorly (I'm talking in
the D to F range). If there was better clarification on what the exam
encompassed and what was allowed, or if I was less honorable and looked stuff up
online without knowing if it was allowed beforehand, then I could've received a
better grade.

Fortunately, the midterm is only 10% of the grade (with the final being 35%...
here's to hoping that I do better) so I'm only like 4% down. Also the grading
scale doesn't include an A+ so I haven't shut myself off of a letter grade...
yet.

What about the distributed systems midterm? I plan to take it this weekend; it
should go well. And great class by the way - in terms of content, homework,
programming assignments, (and hopefully midterms). Basically, the questions
revolve around the concepts and either tell you to apply them in a scenario, or
ask about the implications of various changes to existing algorithms/systems.

It went fine, nothing unexpected about the exam there - I'm feeling a 95% for
that.

Oh I remember I wanted to mention one other thing: I wasted the weekend before
midterms because I got into Stellaris. Very fun game except for the fact that I
can't play a medium sized map to endgame - small maps don't have enough AI
empires to be interesting, and medium maps run too slowly halfway through
midgame.
