# first 5 hour interview loop experience

I wanted to put big tech but that would imply I was interviewing at one of the
"big tech" companies, which is not accurate. What I mean is that there were
multiple rounds and they gave out system design, puzzle problems (lc), and other
questions and these happened over the span of a 5 hour period.

This was the first time I've had such an interview, and I decided to go in
without preparation because I never want to give an inflated sense of my skills
and wanted to see how I'd do by figuring things out on the fly.

The first round was reasonable in my opinion; I was asked to write some code to
perform a generic everyday task that involved interacting with files in a file
system and make modifications as the requirements changed. Then I had to write
some examples of testing it where, now that I think about it, I failed to
mention a test that checks for invalid inputs. At the time I thought the round
went well so I guess it wasn't too bad.

For the second round, I got a puzzle problem about anagrams. I was able to solve
the initial simple problem but I think I answered the space complexity question
"incorrectly" based on the interviewer's response - I basically said that there
were two things that it scaled on: linear with respect to the character set and
logarithmic with respect to the length of the strings. They then asked for an
exact number so I said 52 assuming [A-Za-z]. I also think they didn't understand
the logarithmic answer, though I explained that we needed to maintain a count
and the number of bits to store a number is the log of that number. It is kind
of pedantic I will agree.

There was a second part to the second round, where they asked a modified version
of the first question and I wasn't able to get a runtime efficient answer for
it, but was able to explain where things were inefficient (work was being
repeated) in my solution. I was able to figure out an improved answer around 10
minutes after that round ended, but that of course was too late. If this was an
onsite interview, could I have flagged down the interviewer after the fact and
shown him my solution? Obviously, when it's virtual there's a chance that I
looked it up but if it was onsite then there is less of a chance to do so.

In the third round, I was mainly asked about a few work scenarios and also had
to give some times when certain things happened. I was able to come up with
examples for most things thanks to writing about them in previous posts, but I
eventually got to a point where I had to really think and ended up giving an
extremely vague scenarios that happened years ago that I had no details for -
that was probably not well received because I was literally saying things like
"a, b, and c" because I couldn't remember what a, b, and c were.

The fourth round was system design. While I believe I am pretty good with high
level system design theory, e.g. start with 1 server, 1 database; break into
multiple services to allocate and scale resources; if application is bottleneck
then run multiple instances and load balance; if database is bottleneck then
maybe shard on some id; and so on, I definitely failed this round. I was given a
single sentence to work off of like "design x", and wasn't sure how to begin. I
started by jumping into data that might be recorded and putting together a
schema for x, then coming up with endpoints based on what I thought my be
needed, and then tried to start scaling it. Things went so poorly that I started
deleting my design towards the end of the round because I overcomplicated it and
I ended the round with just some text on the whiteboard explaining things...
lol...

The fifth round was another puzzle problem about inserting parenthesis so they
match. I wasn't sure how to approach it, so I asked the interviewer if this is
equivalent to finding unmatched parenthesis, and then going through that list to
find what's missing - they said no and repeated the original question word for
word and gave an example. I then took the example and showed what I meant and
how it gave the same answer in this case but they never said if it was right or
wrong, I guess it was an unexpected angle too tackle the puzzle. Without any
more guidance, I decided to solve my alternate but potentially equivalent
problem. I was able to write the entire thing, but I'm not sure the interviewer
thought it was correct. They had me go through my code manually using two
provided examples - it gave the correct answer for both of them - then had me
answer space/time complexity questions about my solution which I gave, and asked
me if I could improve on it. I said that I might be able to combine the
parenthesis matching phase with the missing count phase but I don't know how to
do it at the moment, and that because it's an interview question there's
probably a slicker solution than what I came up with.

I later looked up the two puzzle questions and lc was literally the first thing
that came up from search - I can see why people practice lc now because it
probably looks a lot better when you can answer these questions quickly and
succinctly instead of slowly reasoning through them like I did. I still refuse
to do it, though. The answer that I came up with for the anagram followup after
the interview was the textbook answer. The answer that I came up with for the
matching parenthesis was not, but if I did combine the two phases it was - I was
hesitant to do so because I wasn't convinced that adding one parenthesis to
specially crafted input could somehow make the whole thing collapse down and
make previous unmatching parenthesis match; it would have taken me too much time
to reason through that most likely.

For system design I think the first thing I should have done is just go through
one specific use case/user story for x, set up the system for that single case
instead of a generic x system, then start scaling it. Because I was unable to
come up with the initial design, I was not able to get anything done in that
round. Interestingly, I feel like doing that first step is more product manager
focused which is where I lack the most experience because every company I worked
for has engineers focused on technical things only.

That's how the interview went. If I had to rate myself, I would rate the rounds
good, medium, medium/bad, bad, medium for an average of a little under medium;
therefore I'm not expecting an offer. There are other details that I'm leaving
out or fudged that change my assumptions on the importance of each round, too,
and I'll just say the bad rounds were probably the most important.

And honestly I have been losing sleep over it, which is why I've written this
extremely early in the morning. Do these interviews require weeks or months of
dedicated studying to pass? Is this expected and if so why is it like this? Am I
willing to compromise my values and do interview preparation courses and/or cram
puzzle solutions next time for a better chance? Not yet.
