# personal yearly reflection 5

2 years ago:

> Well, there's a chance I won't be able to post this exactly on Decemeber first
> because I don't feel the normal drive to write it but we'll see.

1 year ago:

> Au contraire, I have the motivation this year. In fact, I wrote this a few
> weeks before December 1st and agonized over trying to find things to write
> about.

This year... it's a week late. Writing this was on my mind for the past week but
I've been busy enough that I was willing to delay the less important things for
more time.

## recap

### remote work

Still remote and in the same job. It still has the classic design/pm
bottlenecks, though in this case the issue is specifically with design.

To be honest, I have been casually looking for a new job since the second half
of the year, but nothing much has come out of it. I had some interviews and
neither went well from my perspective - I'm just not a good interviewee (and I
didn't think the process was carried out well, but irrelevant). I plan to put
more effort into applying next year.

I'm definitely trying to avoid a standard B2B software engineering position
because... yeah. I'm just more technical at heart, and don't want to have
several layers of indirection between myself and the user (if there are users).

### school

So I have been taking two to three courses a semester for the past few
semesters, and in the ideal scenario, I'll have finished the program by next
summer. Actually, I've already finished all the computer science requirements
and just have math courses left (what is actual computer science but math on
computers?)

In general, I've been able to complete most of the work on time but this
semester has been quite difficult. One of the classes covers relatively new
topics (for me) and is hard and the other is just extremely unorganized. Finals
are in a week and I've just lowered my grade expectations to be B's. Not saying
that I expect a B, but rather that I would accept a B (which only requires
receiving 50s and 40s on the final exams, curves withstanding).

It's a good thing that I did not actually have the chance to TA this semester or
I might have fallen over. A little ironic because I specifically remember
writing about how some people in my classes would publicly complain about their
workloads when it was self-inflicted during my first year and hear I am, doing
something similar. But not complaining as hard, or as publicly, I hope.

### blog stats

I've written 26 times this year, which is a lot more than I thought, and I think
I was able to write about some nice technical topics (with hopefully more in the
pipeline); some of it related to topics covered in graduate school. I plan to
write a few more posts related to it, or at least have a retrospective on what I
thought about the specific courses I took.

### last year's goal summary

1. Maintain my current lifestyle quality - technically yes, but with graduate
   school I've been busier than normal with this semester having a noticeable
   impact on qol.
2. Do well in school - yes, with straight A's so far but that might not last
   after this semester ends.
3. Learn new recipes/improved cooking techniques - I've been too busy to
   experiment in cooking.
4. Drink water - I think this has been good, but I did notice I stopped doing as
   well recently (probably because of school)
5. Sleep on time - Same thing as water, good until recently.

### settling in

Two years ago I considered moving and/or buying a house. One year ago I decided
not to. This year, that idea is back on the market. In fact, it's also related
to my new job search. I'm looking for a job that will cover relocation and that
I can have for the rest of my career, ideally. If you put together all of these
things... well, there are some places I have in mind. Unfortunately I put in an
application months ago and haven't heard anything since. The job market is kind
of tough.

I'm keeping things short this year because my mind is filled with things
unrelated to what I prefer to write about.

### new goals

1. Graduate
    - Pretty obvious, and should happen soon.
2. Get a new job, new place
    - Straightforward
3. Drink water (habitual)
4. Sleep on time (habitual)
