# framework gaming and poe 2

Path of Exile 2 early access was released around a week or so ago, and I've been
having a lot of fun playing it... kind of.

In reality, with the integrated graphics of the framework laptop (Intel Iris Xe
Graphics), I get at best 30 fps in town and that turns from fps to spf (seconds
per frame) with any moderate action.

I did hesitate buying early access because there was a high chance this would be
the case, but after spending 3 days just theorycrafting builds before buying, I
hyped myself up enough to purchase access. Besides, the price is equivalent to
buying premium currency ahead of time, and I do have things from poe 1 that will
roll over.

Coming up with builds is probably the main reason I like poe a lot, as it fills
my interests of research, and playing the game fills the interest of testing,
though it takes a bit of time to get a build fully fleshed out, especially when
depending on rare (unique) items. There are pretty straightforward builds like
abusing cast on x mechanics, which exist in poe 1 and other newer ones like
stacking mana and using archmage/mind over matter which seem pretty viable,
theoretically. Figuring out which mechanics work together and which don't is hit
or miss, and that could be due to intentional disablement or just a bug but it's
all fun and good. In fact, I think would wager poe 2 theorycrafting requires
more thought than most jobs; it's just that jobs typically require prerequisite
knowledge and are less accessible.

I will admit that I'm somewhat of a hipster when it comes to games with builds
and metas, because I typically try to avoid copying popular or well-known
strategies and instead prefer to come up with my own, even if they aren't as
efficient. In fact, I would say I've mellowed out considerably because I've
become a 95% is good enough kind of player instead of fighting for the last 5%
of any metric.

I haven't made too much progress so far, only having made it to the end of the
third act with approximately 50 deaths because of the framerate issue so far. I
consistently started getting less fps as I progressed, but don't know whether
it's due to the later parts of the game being less optimized or just more
intense. Either way, all boss fights typically run at 3 fps or less, and whether
I can complete it is typically luck based (though I was able to specifically
cheese the Chimera fight in act 3). I don't think I can progress much further
without more frames, but since I enjoyed both poe 1 and poe 2 so much so far,
and because I think the game will last years, I've decided to invest in it.

How? I've spent a few hundred dollars on an external gpu. Or at least the parts
to one - some have yet to arrive, and I'll have to assemble it and pray that it
works. For my entire past gaming life, I've basically picked games around what
my low tier systems can run, but now that restriction should be lifted since I
plan on using a 4060. Ideally, I'll be able to play a lot more graphics
intensive games on it and can even go back and enjoy other games that I played
before at higher framerates/with smoother gameplay. At worst, the parts don't
hook up well and I return them...
