# framework gaming and egpus

So last year (new year's joke), I successfully put together an egpu (external
graphics processing unit) and hooked it up to my framework laptop. So far, it
has satisfied all of my graphics needs and it seems like the bottleneck is now
the cpu.

Instead of talking about actual gaming with the egpu, I'd like to discuss a
bunch of random things that came up when purchasing, building, and using it. I'm
a novice when it comes to hardware so a lot of this may be uninteresting.

I decided to buy the parts late November last year, and ordered a dock (EXP GDC
TH3P4G3), 650w psu (power supply unit), and a gpu. This was kind of an impulse
buy, as there were good black friday deals and I did not do too much research on
egpus beforehand; in fact I wasn't sure that the pieces I bought would be
compatible with each other - the main thing I looked at was that the psu could
power the gpu.

I ordered the dock separately from the psu and gpu because it seemed to only be
available from aliexpress, an exp gdc something something; that ended up
arriving within 2 weeks or so. On the other hand, I received estimated dates for
the psu and gpu around the same time - expected arrival late January.

This brought up an question that I discussed with some friends - is it
reasonable to expect a package to be shipped and delivered within 2 weeks in the
modern world? The general consensus was yes, and because the gpu/psu was
expected to arrive two months after ordering, I ordered similar items from
elsewhere and cancelled the original order. The reordered items arrived in late
December.

While I was waiting for the items, I did more research on gpus. What I bought
was a nvidia rtx 4060 i.e. the low end of the newest series of cards at the
time. What I read online was that the 4060 is barely an upgrade compared to the
3060 which sports more vram, more cores, and more (a lot of other things). I
came across this tidbit a few days before the gpu was going to arrive so I did
not attempt to swap it out. It still performs better though, but it does seem
weird that the newer generation would have less resources. Either way, I'm sure
my needs are much less than what the cards can handle so hopefully I'll never
hit the limits.

Putting together the egpu was actually pretty simple, but anytime I heard a
weird cracking noise I was afraid that I just threw \$400 down the drain because
I broke something. I don't have a case for the parts so it's freeform and does
look quite wonky and lopsided but is overall stable.

Overall it's very convenient; want to use your laptop normally? Unplug from the
egpu. Want to game or do graphics intensive work? Plug into the egpu. As long as
you powered on your laptop with the egpu plugged in, you can plug and unplug it
without any worry.

## (semi-solved) issues

One issue I ran into was that, for some reason when powering on the laptop with
the egpu plugged in, I had no audio drivers - nothing showed in device
management. Obviously one could work around this by using external microphones
and speakers, but this was quite weird. After lots of random testing, I found
out that this only happens when the hardware switch for the framework's built in
laptop is disabled as the laptop powers on. Sliding the switch to on position
before turning the laptop on resolves the issue (and you can toggle it
afterwards without a problem).

Another issue I had was around the display freezing and never recovering,
necessitating restarting the laptop by holding the power button to shut it off
before turning it back on. I first found a workaround which was to quickly
unplug the egpu when this happened, causing most programs running on it to crash
but the display itself to recover, but think I've solved the issue by changing
the link state power management in advanced power settings.

I haven't run into any other problems yet.
