# start with a statically typed language

This is my opinion.

In the context of learning programming and computer science, it is best to start
with a statically and strongly typed language. Dynamically typed languages are touted
as offering higher productivity and easier to write but these things are not important
to the novice programmer.

One of the most popular languages to start out with according to the internet happens
to be python which is kind of on the opposite side of the spectrum here (although
it is strongly typed). A few reasons are:

1. Easy syntax
2. Versatile
3. Good documentation/community

I cannot give a beginner's eye on these reasons but, personally, I do not think the
syntax is that much easier than what can be found in other languages - unless you
count the boilerplate setup that comes with many compiled languages which shouldn't
matter as it's not much noise. In terms of versatility, this is also something a
beginner should not be too interested in - yes, python is used in various fields
like machine learning, web development, data science, game development, etc. but
this is not something that someone looking to learn solid fundamentals should be
concerned about. The community is a good reason though, because it's good to have
support as you learn.

However, a statically and strongly typed language provides one huge and important
benefit that carries over to programming with other types of languages.

## learn to solve your own errors

In some of my free time, I help beginner programmers troubleshoot their issues and
this errors that are provided an overwhelming amount of time are ones like this

<!-- markdownlint-disable line-length -->
```javascript
(node:28176) UnhandledPromiseRejectionWarning: TypeError: Cannot read property 'name' of undefined
```

```python
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "f.py", line 21, in <module>
AttributeError: 'Block' object has no attribute 'length'
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable line-length -->

First things first, it is interesting to see how many people either do not understand
what this kind of error message means or do not read.

I've tackled so many issues with this problem and 99% of the time it is due to not
understanding types. Someone is using a variable and doesn't understand that the
data represented by the variable is a certain type with certain properties and methods
and is trying to access some arbitrary property that doesn't exist.

So much time could be saved if the programmer just kept this in mind - and this idea
is actually forced upon you when you use a statically typed language because the
types need to be known before run time, so you wouldn't even be able to run the program
without getting this right.

Furthermore, understanding types is a roadway to understanding classes and reading
documentation. When you understand that a variable is of a certain type, you can
pull up the documentation of the class or struct and see what properties and methods
exist on it.

And on a slightly unrelated note, being able to search documentation **by types**
is a huge feature. I mean, have you tried out [Hoogle](https://hoogle.haskell.org/)?

## conclusion

Many trivial errors that are encountered by novice programmers could be avoided if
they started out with a strongly, statically typed language. If one plans to surpass
the level of copying code off of examples and making slight modifications to writing
their own, the fundamentals conferred through the use of such a language is indispensable
in helping you do so.

Once you have a solid understanding of types after getting beat up by the type checker,
you will be able to keep the concept in mind as you work with dynamically typed languages
which have no such support yet will give you errors if you make the same mistake.

Think of it as starting out with training wheels - you go a little slower but are
safer and able to build up a good understanding - and then you take them off and
are able to keep your balance (not make novel errors due to mismatched types).

I wouldn't suggest starting with Haskell though, the syntax is a lot different from
what is usually found in imperative programming languages.
