# puzzle combinations

I was thinking about gifts, and what makes a good gift. A couple years ago, I
purchased a Lego set thinking it would be a great gift; it was a flower set
which means you would spend some time putting it together and could put the
completed piece on display like a houseplant.

I think it was received with a little ridicule (granted, this was a gift
exchange for adults), but I was able to see the finished product recently when
visiting. It looks nice in my opinion.

Anyways, I was thinking of gift ideas again, but this post isn't going to be
about gift ideas. I thought of puzzles for a similar reason - some fun assembly
then a finished product. Then my mind randomly wandered to thinking about the
total number of puzzle piece configurations a puzzle could have.

To keep things simple, consider a rectangular puzzle with square-ish pieces with
4 sides, and each side either has a protruding part or a... not-protruding part.
Or is an edge. Of course, there are many ways this can be set up but let's just
leave the classification simple with 2 (3) classes.

If a puzzle is x by y pieces, how many possible piece configurations are there?

At first glance, this was pretty difficult because the possible configurations
of one piece depends on the surrounding ones. Maybe not too difficult because I
already explained it in a way that makes what I thought of more obvious - each
edge has 2 or 3 possibilities, so it's a simple combination problem depending on
the number of edges in the puzzle.

For example a 2x2 puzzle has 4 non-side edges, so there should be 16 possible
configurations. A 3x3 puzzle has 12 non-side edges, so there should be $2^{12}$
possible configurations.

Is it right? It seems plausible but I didn't check. I also haven't bothered
figuring out a closed form solution for the number of non-side edges for this
kind of puzzle given the sides.

Also in the meantime I decided to remove the puzzle section of my blog and
instead incorporate the puzzle posts here. It kind of messes with the order and
post dates but I can't insert them where they should belong without bumping the
links of all the other posts so I'll eat it. This could be a good lesson into
not having the post ids derived from the same data used to order the posts, but
for more generic scenarios.

Maybe instead of manually breaking things up, I use a tagging system. If I ever
feel like putting one together.
