# encounter with formal math

I've been going back and forth between writing this and not, because my opinion
is constantly changing in real time (and I can also use that as an excuse to
avoid writing).

I haven't done much formal math since my undergraduate courses several years ago
where I minored in math, and I'm currently doing a masters program. I'm on my
last couple of semesters and opted for some heavier math courses as opposed to
computer science courses for the challenge and learning experience... So I
picked advanced Bayesian statistics.

I mean, the computer science courses did have various proofs for things like
optimal checkpointing considering things like failure rate/backup time or time
for full message dissemination (with high probability), but none of them were
really rigorous.

We're about four to five weeks into the course and I think I've gotten a better
handle on things, but the first two weeks were extremely intense and was
basically a full review of an undergraduate level statistics class followed by a
review of an undergraduate level Bayesian statistics class. Mind you, the
current university I'm attending is not the same as my undergraduate one so some
of the topics were actually entirely new while others were not new but still
hard to initially grasp.

It was so bad I was actually a week behind in terms of work up to the third
week, whereas previously I would be on schedule or even one week ahead. The two
largest hurdles was understanding the vocabulary/notation and figuring out jumps
in reasoning being made between various equations. I spent extra time on
weekdays going over things so I could understand them, when for all my previous
classes I did not have to do that.

I think another thing that might be useful is that I now try to reason through
the content ahead of time, before lectures. It's easy to follow the content when
it's being presented, but I don't think I was actually getting it - I would say
this is the trap I fell into for the first few weeks. I also do believe things
have become easier because we're switched focus from the math heavy concepts
like derivations and other things (which are still there, but not as heavily
emphasized) to using software to use the covered techniques to approximate,
simulate, or analyze various real world situations.

Well... we had our midterms and I barely pulled a B+/A- and only after a very
steep curve. I guess my understanding of things is not as good as I expected.
All of the questions were concerned with content covered in the course but
tested understanding in different ways i.e. not just using the same examples in
lecture material or applying formulas blindly. I do appreciate when the exam is
structured this way though, as it tests for understanding over memorization and
is more valuable to me.
