# i am a master

Is that what people with master's degrees call themselves? People with
doctorates get called doctor and have a dr. prefix, so surely people with
masters' can call themselves masters and have a... mr... prefix... That's what
mr. stands for, right? Master?

All jokes aside, I feel quite accomplished; I set my mind (and money) to a one
year commitment and was able to follow through. Technically I haven't graduated
yet since there are 3 weeks left, but I have high enough scores in my current
class to pass without doing anything else.

The real question is if I'll keep grinding for A's this semester, lean back and
relax, or make some half-assed effort to finish the remaining assignments. Who
knows?

## actually finished

![man breaking chains meme](/blobs/130/chains.png)

Well, there's still one week but I've taken the time to finish the rest of the
work ahead of time and for a not-terrible grade, so there really is nothing left
for me to do but wait.

And I don't think it could have come at a better time. To be honest, my
motivation has slowly faded away since last semester, and I have been
procrastinating a lot. In my first semester, I remembered always working ahead
by at least 1 week and even reviewing material weekly. Nowadays, I've been
either on pace or behind and don't even review outside of the week before exams.

### classes

The top 3 classes for me were high performance computing, distributed systems,
and advanced bayesian modeling based on my personal criteria: informative,
engaging, and challenging.

This semester, the only class I had was advanced bayesian modeling and I think
it was great. There was a lot of theory in the lectures while most of the
projects involved real-world application e.g. taking a dataset and running
various analyses on them. The exams were also non-trivial; it required actual
understanding of the material.

In fact, that's something that I've kind of noticed about math and computer
science in general. In pre-university level courses, exams typically focus on
picking a formula out of several to use and applying them. These formulas are
not something derived during the exam but are rather something given in the
lectures. These kinds of exams also continue into the first few years of
university level courses in my experience; I remember doing this for classes
like calculus iii, linear algebra, and even statistics - these are all
non-senior level courses. Only when I took senior and post-graduate level
courses like numerical differential equations, applied algebra, and advanced
bayesian modeling did question become more conceptual or theoretical.

And that's for math specifically. For computer science, I think it's more topic
dependent, as I've had a mix of plug and chug exams and conceptual understanding
exams in both low-level and post-graduate classes. Sometimes you have to just
run an algorithm you learned in class manually, and sometimes there's some
theoretical question like how can you improve something or what changes with a
certain change in an algorithm (though sometimes those are topics covered during
lectures).

To be frank, the conceptual understanding exam is the main reason I've lost
points in advanced bayesian modeling this semester, but I think those losses
were well deserved, and getting things wrongs lets me know where I need to
improve my understanding. And I lived by the curve (not really, but I would have
lost another 4-5 points off my overall grade if there was no curve).

### ProctorU

I had 2 proctoru proctored exams this semester, and a total of 5 proctoru
proctored exams through the program. I still don't think it's a good service but
I felt like updating my opinions about it. I think I talked some trash about
proctoru as far as effectiveness before; let me see if I can find it.

> I'll also say I don't think it would be very hard to cheat despite the checks
>
> - I did not cheat, but as I did the dance I thought of several holes that
>     could be exploited.

There it is. So the first observation I previously made was that I always had an
earbud in because that's how I listen to computer audio. In the past semesters,
this was never called out but I was actually asked to remove them this semester.
Ironically, this led to a scenario where during an exam the proctor disconnected
and a technician was trying to contact me through my speakers but I couldn't
hear them.

When a proctor does disconnect early for some reason, you end up having to do
some relatively shady actions (visit non-proctoru website, download and run
program) to continue the session. From my perspective, it was pretty suspicious
and also not ideal because I had to perform the recovery steps while my exam
timer was running.

There are other things like the environment only being 360 scanned once at the
beginning that should make it easy to cheat, though, because I didn't cheat, I
don't know how effective they are at detecting cheating afterwards. In my first
exam, I had a cup on my table and was asked to move it far away which I did.
This required me to get up, move, and sit back down, and they did not ask to
rescan anything. There's also variability in how proctors evaluate out of places
items. In addition to the first earbuds scenario, this semester, during my first
exam, I left my egpu on my desk and the proctor for that session asked no
questions about it. Meanwhile, the proctor for my second exam did ask about it,
but let me leave it up when I explained it's an egpu and I also used it to
charge my laptop.

I still think the general workflow as a test taker is relatively smooth, and I
had no trouble outside of the one disconnection this semester. While I would
attempt to avoid exams that require proctoru just because of privacy and
convenience reasons, I don't think it's as horrible as its past reputation makes
it out to be.

### projects

I actually liked most of the project/programming assignment in the program. I
guess that while I like conceptual exams, I like applicable(?) activities or
activities where I apply concepts.

Tiled gas simulators and financial simulations run in high performance computing
clusters, distributed key value stores with failure handling, lexers and parsers
for custom grammars, adversarial machine learning programs and
encryption/decryption algorithms, ray tracing and mesh rendering and vector
visualizations, and a lot of bayesian data analyses. These projects were
definitely the highlight of the program for me, and if working on stuff like
this was my job, then I would be a lot happy(ier)... at least for a few years.

Some of the projects came with a paper requirement, of which most were fine
except for the last bayesian analysis which required some actual exposition on
topic of the dataset being analyzed. I didn't hate it though, it's just not very
related to the class content but it matched the format of various academic
papers we read in class.

There were definitely projects that I did not like that took the format of
guided tutorials. Again, I didn't hate them but it just was not the kind of work
I expected in a master's program, and they were all for content that I was
already familiar with so those projects/activities felt more like chores and
busywork.

And then there were presentations; some live and some recorded. All I can say is
that my jaw gets tired after 5 minutes of straight talking. Funnily enough, I
actually spent more time on recorded presentations because I would keep
re-recording audio to stitch together every time I tripped up, and that happens
a lot (I'm not a good speaker). In live presentations, I would just push forward
after a mistake.

### llm usage

The number of times I saw someone saying they asked ai or had a conversation
with an llm about a class topic was... pretty high. And the actual usage was
pretty worrying.

For example, in the security class I took where no one knew what was going to be
on the final or how it was going to be structured, someone went ahead and
generated a multiple-choice exam with some kind of llm and shared in with the
class. On top of the exam including content that was never covered in the course
(fair, considering that's how the midterm was), a large portion of the questions
had choices of which all were wrong or multiple options could be correct (in my
opinion). Furthermore there was no answer key to check against so I'm not sure
how useful the mock exam actually was (spoiler: it was not useful at all). That
post actually received the most number of upvotes I've ever seen in the class...

Then there was the other example where someone would ask a question prefaced
with "I had a conversation with Gemini/ChatGPT and it said" and the shared chat
logs would show it leading them to the wrong conclusions (hence why they're
asking the question originally.) This could be biased as only the
confusing/misleading chats would be the ones being shared; any successful
application of an llm would not end up as a question posted to the public
forums, though sometimes people would try to answer questions with llm output:
"I put your question into Gemini and it said..." Gee, thanks!

### goals

So, one of the reasons I did a master's is because I wanted to leverage the
degree to get a new job doing computer science and not just software
engineering. Or at least not simple software engineering, simple being what I
consider simple.

That has not happened yet.

I applied to several places that I thought were great, and that were
specifically entry-level level which mentioned things like high performance
computing and scientific visualization (classes I've taken), but mainly heard
nothing back or told that I was not a good fit (is that sentence structure
correct?)

Really, cold applying has always been a weakness for some unknown reason as my
response rate for doing that is abysmal, and I don't really want to get referred
in or skip lines because of my meritocracy beliefs.

On an unrelated note, I learned that meritocracy originally had negative
connotations and read the reasons why, pretty interesting material.

### conclusion

Do I think it was worth it? I mean... taking classes while working is
a unique experience (that I may not want to experience again). I enjoyed the
learning, but what I admittedly did not like was the pressure of grading, even
though it's not likely that I would've received poor enough grades to fail out.
Of course, grades are, in a sense, a motivator for keeping up with studies and
are probably part of what kept driving me in the last 2 semesters.

And I'm getting a piece of paper and a line to add to my resume so that's also a
plus.
