# 6 months of egpu

I've been using an external graphics processing unit (egpu) for 6 months and
thought I'd write a bit about my current experience.

The setup I use consists of a Corsair RM650 power supply unit, an EXP GDC
TG3P4G3 dock, and a Nvidia GeForce RTX 4060 graphics card. And I have a
Framework 13 for my laptop which has Thunderbolt 4 certified ports.

The point of an egpu is to get better graphics performance out of a laptop, so
let's see how it does. The first thing that should probably be looked at are
some benchmarks. Now, as a forewarning, I have literally never attempted things
like hardware benchmarking so a lot of this will look and sound very amateurish,
because it is.

## benchmarks

When searching for benchmarks to run, the first thing I came across was
PassMark, which has a 3D benchmark. The overall score was **under 10,000** with
DirectX 9, 10, 11, 12 tests achieving half the number of frames compared to the
average (around 50 fps versus 100 fps) and GPU Compute coming in at around 2500
ops/sec compared to the average of 9300 ops/sec - a crazy difference.

![passmark benchmark](/blobs/133/passmark.png)

Is something seriously messed up with my setup? Or with the benchmark? Is this
the performance gap between people who overclock versus those that don't? What
does an overall score of 10,000 mean compared to the median/average around
20,000? If we look at the
[Understanding Results](https://www.passmark.com/support/performancetest_faq/understanding-results.php)
link, it mentions things like

> The bigger the number the faster the computer.

and

> A computer with a CPU result of 4000 can process roughly twice as much data as
> a computer with a result of 2000.

and

> Double the score, double the performance?
>
> If the Mark value is doubled, does this mean double the performance?
>
> The vague wishy washy answer is: Yes it does, some of the time, at least for a
> limited set of circumstances.

Am I only getting half of the maximum performance with this setup? I don't know,
so I decided to try another couple of benchmarks - 3DMark. Yes, it's a different
thing. I ran the Steel Nomad DX12 and the Time Spy benchmarks and mocked up the
results here against other 4060s. The scores were not exactly 2300 and 8000 but
were close enough.

![3dmark benchmarks](/blobs/133/3dmark.png)

Here, we see that the Steel Nomad benchmark was pretty on par, while the Time
Spy result is quite under. However, unlike PassMark, 3DMark does have
differentiate between gpu and cpu scores. In fact, Steel Nomad only has a gpu
score component, implying that the gpu performance of an external 4060 matched
the average 4060, assuming most of the scores submitted were from non-egpu
setups. What about Time Spy?

![timespy gpu benchmark](/blobs/133/timespy.png)

Better than before, but still under, and, in fact, on the very tail end of the
distribution so not good at all. Through this one can surmise that my cpu is
going to be a limiting factor in benchmarks from the differences.

So what do these benchmarks say about this setup performance-wise? In some
situations I may have subpar performance, and in others it may match a typical
setup. One thing to keep in mind, that I read many times, is that higher end
graphics cards are not ideal for this setup because the performance bottleneck
in this case is the thunderbolt connection. I do not know how to check the
actual numbers there, but as far as I can tell, the 4060 can be fully utilized.

Ok, benchmarks are cool and all, but what about actual games? In the next
section I'll look at what games I've played and also go on random asides on what
I think about the games themselves. These are games that would have been
previously unplayable without an egpu.

## Cyberpunk 2077 (2020, 2023)

> Just don't forget, the game is fixed.

That's a quote from the
[Cyberpunk 2077: Phantom Liberty - All In](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P39n86v-T7w)
promotional video, and it's hilarious when you consider the broken state of the
game on release. I'm not sure if the double meaning was intended, but I think it
was clever nonetheless.

With the egpu, the game itself was smooth, and I enjoyed the game for around 150
hours, doing all of the quests, endings, and completing multiple playthroughs.
The only time I noticed an issue was when vehicles collided, as the game and
audio would both start stuttering, but I think that's more of a cpu issue and
wasn't a common occurrence.

Overall an enjoyable game and an enjoyable experience.

## Path of Exile 2 (2024)

As a long-time Path of Exile player from all the way back when the
Domination/Nemesis league was being run, I was quite excited for Path of Exile
2, and even bought it before I had the egpu. In fact, this game was one of the
reasons I bought an egpu, as the integrated graphics (Intel Iris Xe Graphics)
was definitely not enough to run the game.

The game runs well with the egpu, but the new bottleneck was network where
issues like lag and desync made the game not smooth. And I overall do not enjoy
playing Path of Exile 2; I think I just don't enjoy grindy games anymore, and
it's severely lacking in content and builds even since the 0.2 patch. I do have
around 150 hours in the game though. Some of that time is from before the egpu
though, but I'm not sure how much.

## Helldivers 2 (2024)

I admittedly have never played the first entry in the Helldivers franchise, but
a friend wanted me to play Helldivers 2 with them. I do enjoy co-op games a lot,
and thought it would be quite similar to Alien Swarm: Reactive Drop which I also
enjoy, so why not.

Unlike the previous games I've talked about, Helldivers 2 takes some effort to
get running smoothly. In fact, even with manual config changes, it's likely that
the game starts stuttering in common scenarios. There is a lot of discourse
online about how recent patches have really tanked the game's performance, and I
feel like a victim of those changes. To be honest, I think it's a cpu issue.

I did enjoy the Super Earth content update though, but, in general, as a game,
in my opinion (that's a lot of commas!), I think there is just a lack of things
to do. It's still fun with friends though, and it can be fun with randoms but
it's a toss up. This game has probably one of the most dubious randoms of all
co-op/casual games I've ever played. 150 hours. Again.

## Risk of Rain 2 (2019)

Another friend wanted to play Risk of Rain 2. Ok, sure, let's do it. For
whatever reason, trying to run it without the egpu causes the game to run at 15
or less frames, despite looking relatively simplistic and having seemingly
simple requirements.

It's a fun game - it definitely gives you a sense of accomplishment when beating
harder things, and also satisfies that becoming overpowered feeling if you do a
run for long enough and get enough items. It also actually had some
optimizations recently though I haven't played it since then, but it was running
fine on the egpu beforehand. Without DLC, I've unlocked everything and played
most of the gamemodes, though I haven't been skilled enough to complete an
eclipse run yet.

Crossplay is broken as hell, as having it enabled seems to cause constant
disconnections in even non-crossplay lobbies. I've spent 40 hours on the game.

## Baldur's Gate 3 (2023)

I remember playing Baldur's Gate 3 with just the integrated graphics card;
things got pretty toasty, I used tactical view to somehow improve frames, and
cutscenes would play without everything loaded in. This is a little deviation
from the "previously unplayable without an egpu" but it's something that's a lot
smoother with. And I'd say it was only playable because it's turn-based.

With the egpu, the game is a lot smoother. It still does dip under 30 frames
sometimes in Act 3, but as a turn-based game it's still quite playable. I enjoy
the game immensely from general atmosphere to story to exploration to gameplay
complexity.

And there was patch 8 which added some new content just in time for a new
playthrough. I think I've spent around 200 hours on it since getting the egpu.

## Clair Obscur: Expedition 33 (2025)

Possibly the next big game, well, it's already big... as in popular. I like the
game for everything except the gameplay itself. Story, music, visuals are all
amazing, but I find the gameplay itself is pretty lacking. It doesn't really
have the mechanical depth that I expect from a turn-based game. Or at least I
didn't find where the fancy mechanics were hidden.

I think the story and game are pretty linear though that only affects
replayability which I don't find too important. The game ran surprisingly
smoothly, and it took 50 hours to do everything I could find.

## Jump Ship (Demo) (2025)

Ending this with another co-op game that was released a few weeks ago literally,
and not one I would think of putting here unless I experienced poor performance
like in Risk of Rain 2.

The first time I played with friends I was getting under 20 frames despite
having the egpu plugged in. We finished some missions but I didn't think I would
be playing anymore, but I enjoyed the game so I tried the tutorial and the
frames were fine.

The next time we played I consistently had above 45 frames, which is good enough
for me. A nice co-op game and I have 10 hours in it. It's kind of like railjack
gameplay from Warframe, but a lot better.

## conclusion

I think the egpu was extremely worth it; a good \$400s spent. There were other
games that I've played, but I'm not sure how important the egpu was in terms of
frames for those. Either way, those other games have been smooth thanks to the
egpu or not. For the games listed, I was mainly playing on medium to low
settings. When games were not smooth, the issue seems to stem from a weak cpu,
which is actually upgradeable because Framework.
