# personal yearly reflection 6

## recap

### job search

I think I've been attempting to get a new job for over a year now, and that
hasn't been a successful endeavor to say the least. I think there is a mix of
factors at play here, the largest of which is a _dubious job market for software
engineers_. Other factors that affect things are probably my general lack of
skill at job applications, my strict requirements about how my position is
related to things that I think are "bad", and my inability to apply for jobs
that I may be unqualified for.

To provide a little more detail on the latter points, though they may have
already come up in previous posts, I'll say that my response rate for a job
application has almost always been in the single to low double digit percents -
and that's with taking the time to write cover letters and customize resumes. In
fact, I actually only got my first job after several hundred applications during
a "hot" job market, though my second job came pretty fast. Because the
application process is opaque, it's hard to know how to do better.

What about job requirements related to "bad" things? What do I consider "bad"?
To step back a bit, I do want to do more computer sciencey software engineering
and did a Master's degree to facilitate this goal. However, in my observation, a
lot of deep tech work falls under the research arms of big tech companies, and I
think big tech is "bad", which means I would never take a job with some of the
largest software engineering companies (this does not mean I wouldn't take an
interview (for practice, I swear!) though). The line is kind of blurry though,
because there are times where I considered working for something like a
non-profit funded by social media/ad money, or considered working for the
government which is currently... At the end of the day, it's up to me though I
try to keep true to myself.

As for applying for jobs that I think I'm unqualified for, I think it's pretty
sad funny when jobs have a list of requirements but then say things like "If you
think you're underqualified apply anyways especially if you're from an
underrepresented group". I personally only would attempt applying if I had all
the main requirements and several nice to haves that come with a typical
application.

All in all, no new job. But with the cooling market for software engineers (and
maybe others), then it might be better for me to hunker down and hold on to my
current position. I may be delusional but I think that I both outperform and am
cheaper than my peers.

### retirement???

I wasn't sure if I wanted to write this as it may come across as a brag. After
several years of average tech jobs with neutral to positive societal impact, I
have obtained over 7 figures of wealth through making above average money and
saving aggressively. Unfortunately, I do not think it is enough to retire. But
maybe it is enough to quit tech; I really could not say. However, we also may be
in an AI bubble right now so if that pops then I could lose some of that -
hopefully I'm not hit too hard because I don't have high exposure to AI related
stocks.

While the previous section details me looking for another job, I would also not
be adverse to exiting the tech industry because I think it's hard to find a
fulfilling job and I'm not a big fan of the culture overall, which is ironic
because I enjoyed and have been enjoying software engineering in non-corporate
settings for almost two decades, and I am holding on for dear life after only a
few years working professionally. Obviously there are other industries where one
doesn't have a fulfilling job AND also gets paid peanuts so I'm not really in a
position to complain.

I do find it daunting to start another career path when I've already spent money
on certifications (bachelor's, master's) for computer science, though there are
other things I would be amicable towards doing. I do not mind starting again as
a junior as I love to learn. And I mean that wholeheartedly and am not saying
that as some selling point.

### blog stats

I've written 12 times this year compared to last year's 26. I have missed one
month, but to be frank, one of the posts this year is filler that I made to
convince myself I didn't miss 2 consecutive months. Even this post, which I
would typically have written days ahead of December 1st, I'm putting together on
December 1st - at least this technically guarantees that I won't have to write
anything else for this year since this can count as my December post. I'll
probably have at least the second part for my simplex posts by the end of this
year, though.

I think the lack of writing stems from a couple issues which are the lack of
motivation to start writing something, and the lack of things to write about. If
I do have something to write, like the recent simplex method post, and I
motivate myself enough to start writing, then I can definitely put the effort
into doing so. However, I seem to be lacking motivation to start, which is why
the second part is not coming along at all - even though I have ideas on what I
want to put in it. Surely I'll have it ready this month though. Right?

### last year's goal summary

1. Graduate - I graduated in Spring 2025. It was a good program and I wrote some
   thoughts about it in a [previous post](/posts/130).
2. Get a new job, new place - this did not happen. I think I'll be hunkering
   down at my current job for now. If I can keep up my savings rate then I
   should definitely have enough money to retire in at most a decade, then maybe
   I can get a new job and new place.
3. Drink water - probably drinking less than I could be, so I'll make a note to
   improve that this year
4. Sleep on time - I think I sleep well outside of my turn in the on-call
   rotation. When it is my turn, I basically attempt to stay up constantly and
   only sleep in like 30 minute to 1 hour intervals. It's weird because our
   production environment isn't even volatile - I just don't want to miss a page
   and have it go to someone else when it's my responsibility to handle them.

### daily, weekly, yearly routines

Do I even have anything I want to write about here? I think this section (as in
the section after last year's goal summary) was supposed to be about looking
forward, but, to be honest, I think I've settled into a normal routine of work,
chores, relax. Maybe I could write a little about how a younger me would've
expected something different with much higher expectations but nah. The current
me thinks is content to be where I am now, and I think this is a mindset that
one needs to slowly realize (if it's coming to fruition) to avoid a midlife
crisis. Maybe not though, as reading the Wikipedia page on midlife crises shows
that it could be something else.

### new goals

1. Maintain the status quo - I say this, but I am still on the lookout for a new
   job. This could be some form of copium; didn't get a new job? I'm just
   maintaining the status quo!
2. Drink water (habitual)
3. Sleep on time (habitual)
