# ai problems are people problems and other things

## people problems

AI is still going strong and has even penetrated my place of work, and I've been
pretty pissed at how it's being promoted and used.

To wind back a bit, there were suggestions to use ai in part of the development
process at my current job from above earlier, but our direct managers pushed
back and said it was up to us software engineers to choose whether to
incorporate it or not.

Our direct managers were then replaced after a few months, and there was a
mandate to start using ai.

My first problem with this directive was that it came from people far removed
from the development process. If we're able deliver features while doing things
well like keep regressions low and code quality high, why does it matter how we
deliver things? That was a question that was asked.

The answer is that we were delivering features slowly, and this was true at some
levels: a planning issue where product features were not being generated, and a
development issue where only a third of the team were competent developers (by
my standards, and I know this sounds insensitive but I think it's true).

Ok, so enter ai for the past 2 quarters.

How was it rolled out? Our engineering director, who is not involved with the
development process put together a plan with the new manager who is also not
involved with the development process (aside: I think the new manager has been
not very useful). They also got two of the substandard developers to be ai
champions. We also had 3 days of ai training which involved watching a
consultant agentically implement features in a toy codebase. Riveting. The best
part was when some devs didn't have access to ai for over a quarter because no
one was keeping track of the rollout.

And how did usage evolve and affect our workflows over time?

First, we had a drop in code review quality - larger changesets and more
regressions going out. Multiple production outages. One of the good devs did the
analysis and brought this up to the engineering director. That analysis was
discarded because we're in a "no talking back" environment now. Furthermore, our
engineering director cut review requirements from 2 reviewers to 1 on account of
the increased code volume (but don't worry, you have ai to help you review!).

Second, some of us have recently entered the era of full agentic thanks to our
ai champions. Some being the champions. They have fully automated coding, pull
request, approval, and merging, bypassing the possibility of review by a human
until after the fact. This has been used to implement a "pet project" of one of
them, which would be cool if it didn't cause a critical bug in our application.
I believe part of this was to hit a certain OKR of x% of pull requests were made
with ai assistance.

Has this improved the velocity of us engineers at all? It depends. I personally
went to our engineering director and asked to see individuals' numbers, knowing
the "gains" would be focused on our two "champions", though they didn't want to
show them due to some privacy adjacent concerns - they showed team level metrics
which showed no effect for the teams that the champions were not in, and a good
sized bump for the champions' teams. I then put together my own numbers by
crawling our pull request information and verified my own hypotheses.

So why do I think ai issues are people issues? I have several thoughts around
this, which are based off of general thoughts of the software engineering
industry in general:

1. software engineering is lucrative
2. because it's lucrative, a lot of people with wide skill ranges go for it
3. evaluating software engineers when hiring is messed up
4. the wide skill range and messed up hiring leads to a mixed group
5. opportunity seekers (people who joined because lucrative) are less likely to
   be as skilled as others
6. opportunity seekers are more concerned with climbing the ladder
7. climbing the ladder means hitting numbers and looking good to leadership
8. being high up in the ladder means you make decisions
9. people making decisions are possibly less skilled than the people they lead

-

1. ai does work that appears good but may not necessarily be good
2. this means ai output needs to be reviewed properly
3. lower skilled devs may not be capable of reviewing output properly
4. opportunity seekers do not care about reviewing output as much as long as it
   furthers their career goals

And this is how slop is promoted and gets through.

## coding slop

Looking back, my [first post on ai](/posts/59) was almost 4 years ago. What was
my conclusion?

> In short, the complex black box types of ai that are gaining popularity for
> use in today's systems are more suited for subjective tasks where new
> perspectives are welcome, while its usage for objective tasks should be
> limited. In both cases, it should be pair with human oversight to avoid
> issues.

At this point, I would change this a bit. I think back when I wrote this, I
considered coding an objective task - if I want to add two numbers I need to
write `a + b`; if the ai generates `a - b` then there will be big issues unless
that problems is caught. I think ai can get a lot of moderately complex logic
correct on the first try. Obviously I'd still check it, though.

I think where ai falls short now is on overall technical architecture and
planning, and this is where the human has to step in. You say that this is a
"subjective" task that I talked about 4 years ago and maybe you're right; I
don't know. You may also say things like: "Erm Claude Opus 4.5 to 4.8 is good at
architecture. You're probably using GPT-5.5 or Composer 2.5 which is better for
your code logic!" No, in my opinion all models I've tried fall short, and I've
tried a lot over the past few years. If I ask ai to change something, it's very
likely to make that change by _adding_ code. Not removing or reorganizing. This
leads to a codebase with hundreds of hacky patches that looks like it's been
through several generations of software engineers. Part of this is a people
issue, because the prompter could come up with a better high level plan.

There are also various coding style issues I have problems with, but that's more
subjective. I'll just leave a list without much explanation.

- Excessive checks/safeguards
- Comments that explain what
- Not following conventions
- Repeated helper/utility code
- Excessive testing

Oh, just add a new skill to your harness and it won't make that problem anymore!
Screw off.

## work slop

You know what looks good but is actually a pain to go through? 10 page prds
(product requirements documents) and 10 paragraph pull requests. When I have to
read these things, I die a little inside.

Sometimes the content is good, if a little wordy, but more often then not it's
full of useless words. I've seen documents that talk reference things that do
not exist, that want things done in a way that is opposite of how things are
currently done (no it's not because the new way is revolutionary), and contain
references to files located on the persons' personal workstation (for example:
"and for the architecture, see /Users/person/x"). And then I have to go to the
writer and figure out what these things mean. Again, it's partly a people
problem.

On a somewhat related topic, I find it interesting how people use ai to enhance
their ai usage - as far as I know no one is writing skills by hand. Who's to say
those skills are actually good or not? And of course there's the use ai to check
ai; it's ai all the way down! Is this similar to distributed systems where
you're trying to build a reliable system from unreliable parts? No.

## bus factor

Bus factor - the number of people a project needs to lose before issues due
missing lack of skill or knowledge, roughly speaking - is arguably an important
facet of software development and work in general. What's the bus factor of
agentically developed code? Depending on various factors, it could be high to
none; did the prompter read it after generation? Were there reviewers and did
they read it instead of using a review tool? Is there valid documentation that
isn't just some generated slop?

I've already run into scenarios where code was created agentically, issues
appear, the design is hard to follow, the documentation is slop, and the
original developer was NOT hit by a bus yet. The only way to deliver fixes and
patches in those cases was to use ai, furthering the underlying problem and
reliance on ai. Of course, we could take time to fix up various parts but that's
not a "valuable use of time" according to upper management.

This is arguably applicable to any knowledge work - if the knowledge part is
delegated to ai, and the original worker (or other workers) haven't spent any
time internalizing it themselves, then who can actually take owernship of it?

## conclusion

A severe lack of accountability is a driving force behind the existence of ai
slop.
