# random requests to my aws application

Recently, I started getting into figuring out some AWS fundamentals and deployed
a website through an EC2 instance.

Naturally, it is hit with random requests here and there that I assume are related
to exploits (well there are also some legitimate ones like trying to get robots.txt
and some unknown ones). I decided to look into what some things could be.

<!-- markdownlint-disable header-increment -->
### GET /api/jsonws/invoke
<!-- markdownlint-enable header-increment -->

Searching for this returns results in [links](https://help.liferay.com/hc/en-us/articles/360018161131-JSON-Web-Services-Invoker)
pointing to Liferay, which seems to be some kind of web portal vendor for enterprise
things.

It seems to be related to an [RCE attack](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2020-7961)
where you can run things based on what is sent to this endpoint - also reading the
documentation it looks like the data is either sent as the request body or as
query parameters.

I'm not fully sure what this request is trying to do since it lacks query parameters
and is a GET request which implies no body, but my guess is it's just initially trying
to determine which severs could be using Liferay and therefore would be susceptible
to this attack.

### GET /DNS.exe

Actually I have no idea what this is. DNS.exe seems to be Windows specific, but
I am running an Ubuntu vm. This request comes in the most often - perhaps it is
just hunting for Windows machines to mess with...?

### GET /.env

This one seems straightforward. Maybe you have your .env file stored at the root
of your project and accidentally are serving it up. Fortunately, I'm not.

### POST /

No idea about this one, something is posting to the index. Unfortunately I'm not
logging the bodies or anything so I can't say much more.

### GET /wp-login.php

Something is checking for some WordPress things. I am aware there are multiple
exploits related to poorly configured WordPress setups (had to deal with WordPress
a while back...) but I assume this is only for scouting out WordPress servers, which
this is not.

### GET /wp-content/plugins/wp-file-manager/readme.txt

Another WordPress related thing. This time I guess it is checking for a specific
plugin which looks to be wp-file-manager. With this in mind, I was able to find an
exploit related to it [here](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2020-25213) which
I assume falls under RCE as you can upload an execute php.

I'm not sure if the person making this request is related to the one above, but
it is a little interesting how this person went straight to checking for the plugin
rather than checking for WordPress first.

### GET /solr/admin/info/system?wt=json

A quick lookup shows that solr is most likely [Apache Solr](https://lucene.apache.org/solr/).
This request seems to be extracting information about what version of solr is being
run (assuming you're running it) and may open up many avenues of attack depending
on the version.

For example, [this](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2019-12409) seems to be
an RCE attack that is available if you are on version 8.1.1 or 8.2.0 and use the
default configuration settings.

### GET /owa/auth/logon.aspx?url=https%3a%2f%2f1%2fecp%2f

So something related to Outlook Web Access, and I assume url is the redirect url.
It decodes to <https://1/ecp/>. Unfortunately I have no idea what this does, but
a search led me to [this page](https://isc.sans.edu/diary/rss/26132) which seems
to have encountered similar requests a few months ago.

It also references [this RCE attack](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2020-0688)

### GET /js/index.php

No idea why a php file would be under the js directory, and this is too generic
of a request for me to tie it down to anything specifically. Maybe it is like some
file browser thing.

### GET /vendor/phpunit/phpunit/src/Util/PHP/eval-stdin.php

So this looks like some file that shouldn't be exposed which evals stdin. Pretty
straightforward and documented [here](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2017-9841).

### GET /console/

Maybe this is like a shell with root access on some servers? Too generic to find
things about easily though.

### GET /ab2h, /ab2g

Honestly I feel like someone typod something at this point, but also ended up typing
in my server's ip or domain name along with it somehow.

### GET /.well-known/security.txt

This is an interesting one, as it seems to be a [proposed standard](https://securitytxt.org/)
for websites. The quote on the page says

> When security risks in web services are discovered by independent security researchers
> who understand the severity of the risk, they often lack the channels to disclose
> them properly. As a result, security issues may be left unreported. security.txt
> defines a standard to help organizations define the process for security researchers
> to disclose security vulnerabilities securely.

So does this mean my EC2 instance has a vulnerability? I would sure hope not...
Anyways, that got me thinking specifically about XSS and I realized I would have
to make an effort to avoid it in the near future of developing my project.

### POST /mifs/.;/services/LogService

A quick search brings me to [this exploit](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2020-15506)
and a [2020 post](https://blog.orange.tw/2020/09/how-i-hacked-facebook-again-mobileiron-mdm-rce.html)
about things in 2015/2018 regarding it.

### Conclusion

Everything is a learning experience. It might be useful to know what are the most
common exploits going around.
