# personal yearly reflection

## work

### remote work

2020 has been quite a year, especially with the pandemic and everything else
happening. Actually it hasn't really impacted me as I was fortunate to have
started a remote friendly job since last year. Well, at least it is supposed to
be remote friendly, but I'm not fully sure that is the case.

There is a company office in the city so I went there a couple days a week when
I started my job, however it was located in the cbd and took around an hour or
so for a one way trip, so I didn't go every day. The issue here is that I would
often be called out for not going to the office even though it was supposed to
be a remote friendly job. One thing that is important to note is that no one on
my team at the time was in that office as they were located in other places like
Chicago or Canada. I chalked it up to me being somewhat entry level and the
possible thought that if I'm not at the office I'm just being unproductive in my
abode where no one can see me. Well, either way, I have a solid excuse for not
going to the office now thanks to the pandemic, but I did find it kind of weird
I was being singled out for not going to the office initially.

### im a junior/early mid level engineer

So I'm an SE1 at my current company, which uses a scale of associate, SE1, SE2,
Sr, and finally Principal Engineer. As someone in this position, ideally I'm
looking to pick up some interesting technical details that don't come across my
radar when developing small web apps. At this time, the team I was on consisted
of the following (I am A in the following tables):

| Person | Position |
| ------ | -------- |
| A      | SE1      |
| B      | SE1      |
| C      | Assoc    |
| D      | Sr       |

The senior engineer is mainly a front end person and was very knowledgeable in
that area. I'd say the most interesting things he taught us were:
[selector specificity](https://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/cascade.html#specificity) and
how selectors are matched - right to left instead of left to right. These are
the kinds of details I love to learn. Unfortunately, he ended up leaving for a
startup halfway through the year.

### but am i really

Actually a month before he left, management ended up adding a ton more people to
the team and actually split us up into two pods. The teams looked like this:

| Person | Position |
| ------ | -------- |
| A      | SE1      |
| E      | SE1      |
| F      | SE1      |
| G      | Assoc    |

<br />

| Person | Position     |
| ------ | ------------ |
| D      | Sr (leaving) |
| B      | SE1          |
| H      | SE2          |
| I      | SE2          |
| J      | Assoc        |

Right now I am basically the senior on my team as everyone else is new. I also
ended picking up a ton of responsibilities including but not limited to:

- engineering point of contact for customer support teams
- engineering point of contact for professional service teams
- engineering point of contact for external partners (eg for integrations and
    such)
- engineer that goes to customer calls with product manager if needed
- designing features

These roles are not specific to the pods, but specific to the entire team (note
that you would still usually have to go through the PM before I get anything).
There was a noticeable jump in the amount of interruptions and meetings I have
on a weekly basis. I didn't get any form of compensation increase for picking up
all of these responsibilities - I don't really know what to think of this.
Compensation-wise, I'm a junior but with no mentor, responsibility-wise I'm a
mid or senior.

### mentoring realization

As the "senior" on the team I also end up mentoring all the new people, and I
think I've learned a few things about myself along the way. Previously, I
thought I was willing and patient to answer most questions no matter how simple
they are as I commonly do this online when I help others program. This ended up
not being the same case here, as I got quite exasperated at explaining a few
simple things (or at least I believe them to be simple for a beginner) to the
associate on my pod. Things like function arguments and object properties.
Weirdly enough, I do answer these questions without an issue online so what is
the difference here?

Perhaps it's because I'm in a call dedicated to spending time explaining
things - I'll explain, watch them through a screen share and do nothing (because
I explained it poorly or they didn't understand?) and then try explaining again.
Meanwhile my online experience is to type a message that explains it, see if
they get the gist, go off and do something else, and come back if they want me
to double check their solution. It could also be because I just have higher
expectations on what people (in a professional setting) should come in knowing.
The professional setting would also explain why I didn't get annoyed when
teaching concepts at my university as I wouldn't consider that a professional
setting - more like an educational or academic one.

### communication

I really need to figure out how to do the senior thing. One thing I read was
that I should have a recurring 1 on 1 with all the new team members. I'm not
doing that right now and I don't see what it's necessary. I do let them all know
I'm pretty open at all times to discussion when I'm not in a meeting. The thing
is that no one really tries to talk to me - they'll bring something up in the
daily standup and then we'll agree on them to ping me sometime after the meeting
so we can get together but that actually never happens and I end up having to
initiate the conversation. I'm not sure if that's on me or not. Anyways I have
to try to show that I'm approachable somehow.

I also have to communicate with other teams sometimes. I think that's fine, but
sometimes I need to find ways to get technical details across in a non technical
way. I'm not sure that's always possible. For example, I had to say that the
average of averages is not necessarily the same as the average of the sum of
values as it had to do with a calculation in a generated report. I'm not sure if
there's another way to say it so I just included a simple example of them being
different. Customer support was trying to get me to explain this another way to
put in a response, but I couldn't.

### the product

It's an acquired startup. The code quality sucks. Dealing with any of the old
features is a nightmare. We've spent the last year rolling out a fix to
customers regarding a single bug only to realize there is another problem that
was missed or arose from the fix. One issue is code reviews - or the lack
thereof. I used to whip out code extremely quickly, but the bottle neck came
down to code reviews where no one would review things. Eventually people would
just approve without even looking... And it still happens today. It's also hard
to navigate around the code and changing one thing can end up cascading to a lot
of other parts of the product in unknown ways.

There is no documentation on a ton of features. Sometimes a customer comes to
use and asks us how something works, then we have to send someone on an
adventure to dig through code, figure it out, and document it. This really made
me wonder what actually goes into the process of acquiring a startup. I've been
told this acquisition was more to break into a market than to obtain a quality
product...

Anyways that's why I'm casually looking for a new job.

## personal

### what i want in a new job

If I get demoted back to a junior role, then I want mentorship. If I'm in a mid+
role, then I want to be able to control the quality of the product internals
(code/tooling). These are things that I do not have at my current job.

Ideally, I also want a job that deals with interesting/highly technical
problems; networking, databases, graph theory, etc. are all good for me. The
problem here is that applying to jobs that will use these things usually say you
need to know the concepts ahead of time - which I kind of do as I spend most of
my free time learning these things nowadays.

### free time

I used to spend my time programming and playing video games in my (pre)teen
years. Perhaps around 8 hours on week days and 12 hours on weekends with a 20/80
split between programming and games.

Now, I read and program mainly, and for much less time - I'm not sure if it's
because the pandemic is sucking out my energy or if it's just work. I also
sometimes watch some streams or videos. Somehow this doesn't take up all of my
time and I find myself lazing around doing nothing (no problem with that
though).

So I thought I would be able to fill my time with some grad school. It also
intersects directly with my interest to learn the more technical things in
computer science, which is ideal. I'm not sure if now is an ideal time with the
pandemic going on and all the controversy around test taking monitors and stuff,
but we'll see.

Also it would depend on if any of the programs even accepted me. Well, my GRE
scores are pretty average at 159/166/4.0 - but I think they're quite impressive
if you consider the circumstances: no prep, took me 1 hour to complete compared
to the 4 given, and the writing question was something I did not care to write
about. So here's to hoping my applications are good enough. I mean I'm the one
that's going to be paying for my courses so at the end of the day the university
is the one making money by accepting me right? Well it's probably more complex
than that like wanting to keep a good graduation rate (I promise I'll pass) and
other things.

In terms of programming, I've worked on a few personal projects - some simple
websites, games, and the audio fingerprinting thing. Sometimes I wish I had the
motivation to transform these learning projects into actual services. In fact,
out of all of my personal projects I've created throughout my life, I'd say only
2 ever came to fruition - one was some hacks I helped make for a game which we
then sold through a website, and another is a bot I have hosted on Heroku that
provides notifications for ingame events. Well, right now I'm also working on a
simple voting site with a separated frontend/backend to relearn docker. The
actual concept for the site might actually have demand so something concrete may
come out of it.

### goal summary

1. Exercise

    - Even before the pandemic I never really went out. Although, going to the
      office required a 20 minute walk as part of the commute so that could have
      been considered exercise

2. Drink water

    - Common issue for me is that I go for days without directly drinking water.
      I don't die of dehydration because I probably get enough liquids from
      food/soup.

3. Sleep on time

    - Before the pandemic, I would go to sleep sometime between 11-12. Now I go
      to sleep between 1-2. Well for now it's ok as long as I wake up in time
      for the standup right?

4. New job

    - Current one is undervaluing me and I don't find work fulfilling. I want
      one that isn't like this.

5. Grad school

    - Probably a good way to spend free time. Learn more technical stuff
      formally. Maybe get into research.

6. Improve networking

    - I really wish this wasn't necessary, but networking just happens to be how
      the world works unfortunately. Step 1 is to keep in contact with sr
      engineer that left.

7. Improve communication
    - The true difference between a mid level and senior level is not technical
      prowess but rather communication. That's something that the sr told me on
      his last day and also that I read in a ton of places. Naturally, this is
      something I need to work on.
