# file transfer through webrtc

Recently, I've been trying out writing some simple webapps that take advantage
of WebRTC. What I had written was a simple file sharing application. Naturally,
one observation is that there is no need for the server once the peer connection
is made so the files can be transferred outside of the server so that's pretty
cool.

Files are chunked and sent through an
[RTCDataChannel](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/RTCDataChannel).
According to
[understanding message size limits](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebRTC_API/Using_data_channels#Understanding____message_size_limits),

> Messages smaller than 16kiB can be sent without concern, as all major user
> agents handle them the same way. Beyond that, things get more complicated.

However, there are also references to 64kiB and higher, but I stuck with sending
(approximately) 16kiB chunks. It seemed decently quick, but then I imagined I
could speed things up by creating multiple channels.

```js
for (let i = 0; i < chunks; i++) {
	const reader = new FileReader();
	const start = i * CHUNK_SIZE;
	reader.readAsArrayBuffer(
		file.slice(start, Math.min(start + CHUNK_SIZE, file.size))
	);
	reader.addEventListener("loadend", () => {
		nextChannel().send(reader.result);
	});
}
```

This seemed to work ok, but this means the chunks are sent out of order. Well, I
actually already had engineered around that since I assumed the messages could
arrive out of order since during my first tests I would get corrupted images and
a diff of the binary content showed that one chunk was swapped with the other.

This isn't actually the case as there is an ordered option for the
[channel's options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/RTCPeerConnection/createDataChannel#rtcdatachannelinit_dictionary)
so it must have been an async error. I just worked around it by sending
additional data with the chunk like so:

```js
nextChannel().send(
	JSON.stringify({
		name: file.name,
		chunk: i,
		chunks,
		buffer: Array.from(new Uint8Array(reader.result)),
	})
);
```

Which can be stitched together on the remote peer's side.

This was great, but I would run into seemingly random scenarios where messages
just stopped sending. Checking `channel.bufferedAmount` showed that there was
data queued to be sent, but the `message` event was not firing for the remote
peer's data channel. I tried debugging it simply through what can be done in the
browser, but to no avail. Considering this is a peer connection, I probably need
some tools that work closer to the wire like Wireshark. My only guess is that
there is too much data in the buffer as this only happened when I would try
queuing a ton of files at once. Some kind of overflow or what?

I ended up doing a bit of synchronizing and taking advantage of the
`bufferedamountlow` event and `bufferedAmount` property to avoid queuing up too
much data and things seem to work out. I'm not sure if using multiple channels
is even faster because I feel like the bottleneck is on the remote peer's
processing side, although the speed might not have increased because of how I
did the synchronization.

A side benefit of allowing this out of order transfer is that all the files
being sent show up at once rather than files showing up one at a time. Well this
could also be done by sending file data separately from the buffer buuuttt...

Looks good (as in it works well, the actual UI leaves much to be desired but
that's not really the point of the project.)

![file-transfer](/blobs/28/file-transfer.png)

You can even guess at the sizes of the files below a certain threshold by the
amount of bars on the receiver's side. Unfortunately I was too lazy to do the
same for the sender.

If interested, the source is kind of clean so I did make a public repository for
it [here](https://github.com/rei2hu/peer).
