# wrangling with a PaaS provider

I've wanted to write this one for a while but never found the time until now.
Dates, quotes, names, and other things are anonymized.

## background

One of the projects I've worked on previously was something that's developed for
ServiceNow, a platform as a service provider. We had a moderately complex
application for healthcare systems management that was used by various
organizations. Depending on the customer, was either _sideloaded_ (basically
deploying the code to the customer's servers manually) or through the app store.

## intro

One day, I get a dm on Teams that one of our customers, let's call them CU, is
having a major problem with one of our application's workflows - they can't
close work orders when clicking a button. They were sideloaded so it was
possible that something messed up during the upgrade, which was not uncommon.
They claimed that there were no recent updates or changes to their system aside
from a couple that they determined were not the cause. To semi-quote the initial
email on Jan 2021:

> There were several other minor updates that is for SecOp VR applicaton, that
> were non-global changes. The other that is one global property change related
> to performance issue that is changed as HI suggested, but reverting the
> property did not fix the problem so it wasn't related either.

HI is like ServiceNow's support team or something. It was escalated to
engineering (me) after 3 days and I set out to find the problem.

## initial investigation

For most customer specific issues for our ServiceNow application, we would work
on the customer's instance as it was usually caused by some custom configuration
that they applied.

Troubleshooting this was interesting as CU made a clone of their production
environment to a separate instance that they used for development testing. A
support engineer had admin credentials to this instance and we ended up screen
sharing where I was basically guiding him to do all the stuff that I would do
for troubleshooting.

We were able to confirm the issue on their environment and I started looking at
the code - the button made a GlideAjax call (basically a request from client
side to call server side code and return the result) but does not receive a
proper response. The response should be some xml with an answer attribute, but
it was not there and this suggests that the server side code is throwing (and
swallowing) an error.

GlideAjax is poorly designed and always returns a 200 with some xml in all
scenarios.

Because I've run into this issue before (also why I know what a missing answer
attribute means), I tell the support engineer to modify the server side code to
wrap the entire function in a try catch so it looked like this

```js
function closeThing(a, b) {
	try {
		// ...
	} catch (e) {
		return e;
	}
}
```

It's ugly but it worked. GlideAjax sets the answer attribute to the stringified
version of whatever is returned, even if it's undefined or null (again, great
design). After clicking the button to call the upgraded server side code, the
answer attribute was there with the value

```text
InternalError: Invalid JavaScript value of type com.sun.proxy.$Proxy66
(sys_script_include.someuuidthatisprivate.script; line 10)`.
```

What a weird error. We then took the liberty of determining the specific
expression that caused the error and it came out to `typeof specialVariable`.

Would anyone ever expect this code to throw that kind of error? Most likely not.
One thing to know is that ServiceNow has it's own special closed source
javascript compiler/interpreter and this is where I assume the error is coming
from. At this point, I let the support engineer know that this is most likely
out of our hands and help him write an email to CU with the root (at least as
root as we can go) cause of the issue and to contact ServiceNow if to look
deeper into it. What a good days work.

## responses

The day after, we get an email from the a technical lead from CU who was highly
skeptical that the error comes from `typeof specialVariable` because it's native
javascript code. But he tested it himself and agrees this was not working, but
still did not believe it was the root cause and we had to do more investigation.
I ended up putting together what I believe was a minimal working example:

```js
// server
function example() {
	try {
		typeof variable;
	} catch (e) {
		return e;
	}
}

// client
var g = new GlideAjax("some_name");
g.addParam("sysparm_name", "example");
g.getXmlAnswer(console.log);
```

and sent it over. I also took the liberty of explaining how ServiceNow's code is
what processes all the javascript and the error we're seeing is from them. At
this point, we are 2 days in and everything seems to be up to ServiceNow to
handle as CU was also engaging ServiceNow support while we investigated the
issue. Unfortunately it took their support team 2 weeks to get back to CU and
even then they had no real answers - they did not dig deep enough to find what
we had found. If I had to put down a few levels of depth, they would be:

1. Client side code checks response's answer
2. Client side code receives undefined
3. Server side code throws an error
4. Server side code errors at `typeof specialVariable`

and ServiceNow support only hit level 1 and suggested updating the condition of
an if statement for the client side code. Blegh. CU keeps trying to get someone
on the more technical side of ServiceNow while we look at possible temporary
remediations.

## shooting in the dark and a solution?

CU sets up another clone of their instance but which is then rolled back and
they note that the error is not present there. They are able to demo it to
ServiceNow support and they finally admit this is most likely their issue as the
code is identical on both instances. At this point it's already February and
it's been an entire month since the problem showed up.

At this point I am also back on diagnosing the true root cause, but the problem
is that I don't have as much insight into the system as someone who actually
works at ServiceNow. I start running scripts I threw together to compare the
difference between the instances and there are a ton. Too many to be honest, and
flipping things just don't seem to work.

However, a couple of days later, ServiceNow gets back and says that the issue is
due to one of the system properties
`com.glide.script.interpret.short.expressions.threshold` being set to 3800. I
haven't read about this one before so I try looking it up, no information. Did I
mention ServiceNow documentation is terrible? ServiceNow says it is a known
issue, linking to a non-existent or private issue page, and will be fixed in **2
major releases**... Well, since it was discovered by ServiceNow, I assume they
know what they're doing.

7 hours later, the CU technical lead gets back and says the fix didn't work.
Meanwhile, we have the temporary fix in place so things are at least working.

I don't know what the suggested fix was, but I end up deciding to test the
system property out myself. I set the property on one of our development
instances to see if I can reproduce the issue but nothing happens. Turns out,
you have to restart the instance for the change to go through, and to restart
the instance, you have to contact ServiceNow to restart it manually. Crazy.
After 2 or 3 days, I was able to confirm this undocumented property was the
cause of the issue as I had to wait for ServiceNow to restart the instance
multiple times for things to take effect. We let CU know of this.

At this point, I was excluded from the rest of the email chain as my work was
done.

By the way, do you know the reason the property was turned on and had that
value? Because of this:

> The other that is one global property change related to performance issue that
> is changed as HI suggested, but reverting the property did not fix the problem

They just had to restart the instance. Interesting to see see HI support turning
on a property with known issues.

## conclusion

Being a good cloud provider requires good support and documentation. ServiceNow
has neither of these and that's why I hate it.
