# no motivation

I've read in multiple places that once your hobby becomes your job you'll fall
out of love, and I always thought that would never be me, but unfortunately it
just might be the case.

I haven't written a line of code outside of work for several months. I have a
couple things I want to do swimming in my head but I never feel like I have the
energy for. Every Sunday I think to myself "Wow the weekend sure was short" and
dread going back to work.

In fact, here I am typing up whatever and it's just past Sunday's midnight.

Perhaps it's just general burnout, although I haven't been working for very long
and I think the general work load is nothing compared to some stuff I had
before. Maybe a combination of no energy but a lot of free time is the cause, as
back then I was just too busy to have these kinds of thoughts. Maybe the
pandemic plays a part, albeit I'm fortunate enough to be very well insulated
from the effects it currently has.

Sometimes I imagine blowing my brains out - however it's more of a dark humor
kind of thought at this point rather than a serious consideration. Am I
depressed? Maybe.

I believe the best way to pull myself out is through small but consistent
efforts, which is really the reason I'm writing this - as the first small,
consistent effort. Just writing makes me feel better. In fact, the first time I
kept a journal was a few years ago when I was in a similar mood - that's around
the time when some of my first posts were actually written (some are just text
copied from back then but their dates are when they were added to this website.)

Hopefully I can keep it up. Might as well catch some zzzs before I have to start
work today.
