# thoughts on angular, react, frameworks and libraries

Oxford comma anyone?

Recently I've been using Angular and I have to say I'm not a big fan of it. To be
fair, I used React first so that could influence my preferences on ui stuff. I'll
be talking about React before hooks were introduced as that was when I used it.

As far as I'm aware, React is only used for building components while Angular does
that and much more (routing, forms, i18n, etc.), so I'll only be comparing this feature.
They both support using classes, however one immediate difference is how the templates
are defined. In Angular, it can either be a string in the `@Component` decorator
or a reference to an external file

```js
@Component({
    selector: 'some-selector',
    templateUrl: './some-file.html',
    // alternatively template: '<div> hello </div>'
})
class AngularComponent {
}
```

While in React the elements are actually part of the code thanks to jsx, which basically
adds some custom syntax to javascript.

```js
class ReactComponent {
    render() {
        return <div> hello </div>;
    }
}
```

For me, jsx is a lot more easier to develop with. In Angular, if the template is
defined in an external file, then I end up having to flip back and forth. If the
template is defined within the file itself... well it's actually just a string so
good luck working with that. In fact, the first time someone showed me Angular it
was on a paste and this was the first thing I noticed - if it's just a string then
it must be hard to check against errors and things. Turns out there are plugins
and other tools built to help with this so it's not too bad but still.

On the other hand, because jsx extends the javascript syntax, we have actual language
constructs to support the interaction between templates and code. Although arguably
you could say now you need an environment that supports jsx for a good dev experience,
similar to the plugins for Angular. But really, if I remember correctly, jsx just
boils down to `React.createElement` calls so I guess you don't even need jsx if
you want to write that.

```js
@Component({
    // accidentally misspelled name, but who cares it's just a string
    template: '<div> hello {{ nme }} </div>',
})
class AngularComponent {
    name = "reimu";
}
```

```js
class ReactComponent {
    render() {
        const name = "reimu";
        // variable undefined error or something
        return <div> hello { nme } </div>
    }
}
```

One other benefit of how React does it is that the elements are first-class which
means you can pass them around. This allows easy composition of things. Say you want
to conditionally render part of the page? All you need is an if statement

```html
<div>
    bool && <span> hi </span>
</div>
```

And in Angular? Oh there's this thing called a directive

```html
<div>
    <span *ngIf="bool"> hi </span>`
</div>
```

What about loops and other things? Well there's `*ngFor`... but in React you can
just use existing array methods like `map` and return elements. What if you want
to pass the type of the component to be created? No luck in Angular.

Also the syntax allowed in Angular templates is extremely limited. You can't even
use ternaries.

Another thing that both Angular and React allow is passing data as props or inputs.
I think either way is fine, although React's jsx allows some interesting things
with the spread operator and stuff but that's because of jsx. Oh right did I mention
that Angular's input syntax can sometimes clash with actual html attributes? I think
in our case we had an `@Input` called align and it worked on Chrome but not
Firefox as Firefox interpreted it as the attribute rather than the input. Then
again, name clashes being a problem aren't too uncommon.

One thing unique to Angular is that components can also have their own outputs
by decorating an instance variable with `@Output` instead of `@Input`. It sounds
like a good idea at first but then I realized it was a lot more trouble than it
was worth. You get the same functionality in React by taking advantage of the expected
behavior when passing a function through `props`. And for Angular you have to redo
your thinking.

```js
// usage
<ReactComponent fn={myFunction}></ReactComponent>
class ReactComponent {
    // ...
    // watch out for binding issues :)
    this.props.fn();
}
```

```js
// usage
<some-selector    (outputVar)="myFunction($event)">
</some-selector>

class AngularComponent {
    @Output() outputVar;
    // ...
    outputVar.emit(2);
}
```

Is `myFunction($event)` the result of `myFunction` being called? No, actually it's
the expression that will be executed when the `@Output()` variable emits something.
In this case, it will run `myFunction(2)`. Well it makes sense because the entire
template a string, right...? Basically I see this as overcomplicating something
that could already be done - you technically could pass the function in as an
`@Input` to be called. I'm sure I'm missing something here though so maybe someone
will correct me.

Another issue I have with `@Output` is that it promotes stateful components, and
I'm just not a big fan of state as it complicates logic and boy have some of the
Angular components I've seen been complicated.

Change detection is another big one. Again, I think React has it very well defined
while Angular... hmm yes I'm sure you recognize the common theme here. React components
define state through `this.state` and `this.setState`. When something in `this.state`
or `this.props` is updated, then update the rendered template. If you want more functionality,
hook into `shouldComponentUpdate` if you dare. Angular? Well there are `@Input`s
so it stands to reason that changing the `@Input`s should trigger a re-render. What
else? Maybe when instance variables change? Actually no, the rest of Angular's change
detection is based on every expression in the template. That makes sense, as the
template should only update when one of the expressions in it changes. But as someone
who was originally unaware of this, I ended up shooting myself due to it.

Angular has something called pipes - more fancy syntax for their templates. One
is an async pipe which is actually pretty nice. I ended up writing something like
this:

```js
<div>hello, {{ getNameFromInternet(name) | async }}</div>
```

A function that makes a request to get data, which is piped to async to print the
final name. Straightforward and makes sense, right? It worked, but I noticed I was
making numerous requests per second. This is because change detection in Angular
runs every single expression in the template to see if it was changed before performing
any updates so it was running `getNameFromInternet(name)` many times. The workaround
is just to assign the result of the function and use that in the template

```js
<div>hello, {{ namePromise | async }}</div>
// ...
this.namePromise = getNameFromInternet(name);
```

A little annoying - all because Angular was trying to cover all cases of updating
the rendered template. In fact, this means you shouldn't try to have any costly
functions in the template as they get executed per change detection cycle. This
means you need to keep state in the component and make sure it's updated promptly
and properly (uh oh).

Overall, I think Angular tries to present itself as easy to use, and initially looks
so, but then quickly ramps up in terms of difficulty for anything moderately complex.
Meanwhile, React is simple and things that are moderately complex in Angular are
simple in React.

Of course, this is just about ease of use. I haven't done any comparisons in things
like performance, which both React and Angular have claim to. Perhaps a later time.

To tie this back to frameworks and libraries in general, I think each one has a
kind of honeymoon phase - where you're picking it up, learning everything, and thinking
"hey that's cool" - after which you've gotten deep enough to notice its various problems.
Better frameworks/libraries = longer honeymoon phases. In general, I believe that
the less magic a framework has, the better it is as it's much more straightforward
to understand.

Oh right did I mention the Angular documentation is pretty lacking, too?

unrelated: Hey wait! I noticed you generate your site using some of the same ideas
you're complaining about here! You store your template as an html file, read it
with javascript then replace values in `{{ value }}`. It's true, but this setup isn't
meant to be very useful or complex.
