# natural disasters, first world problems, and hobbies

Well, I ended up suffering not too badly. Strongest storm since 1850? Maybe, but
definitely nowhere near the worst outcome thanks to improvements in engineering.

Actually I hear it made its way up to New York and caused some havoc there, too.

No doubt the damage is severe and many are without stuck clean water or
electricity. I was also in this position but fortunately have the resources to
temporarily move, which gives me the opportunity to write this.

I severely mistimed when I was going to be affected and thought I would pass
through without worry a problem. Even when the rain started pouring and wind
grew strong, both power and internet were going strong with a few intermittent
interruptions. The last thing I did while the internet was up was watch some
Youtube videos of the disaster occurring, quite ironic.

The first day went over well, as the utilities went out at night so I just went
to sleep. It wasn't too scary as the wind/rain sounds reminded me of being in a
car going through a car wash.

When I woke up there wasn't much structural damage, just a bunch of trees blown
over that needed to be cleaned up - which is what I spent most of my day doing.
Tired and with not much else to do, I went to sleep at around 8pm. That night
was the first of several poor ones - 90+ degree Fahrenheit, high humidity my
room felt a little like a hellhole. I had the option to crank open a window to
slightly improve the atmosphere at the cost of allowing the roar of a nearby
generator in. Window open or window closed, pick your poison.

The next day I came across another dilemma - what is there to do? All my usual
methods for passing the time, namely doing something on the computer, require
high amounts of electricity. I ended up spending like 10 hours a day re-reading
some books. A couple books from the City of Ember series, every short story that
could be found in "The Short Novels of John Steinbeck", a few books from the
Ender's Game series, and more. Truth be told, I just needed to give my brain
something to do.

I also dug up some old yearbooks and flipped through them (well, not that old,
~5 years or more ago). Probably was not a good idea, as once the day got too
dark to read and I didn't feel like fetching a flashlight, I sat in the dark and
went over various regrets. God, sometimes I feel too old to be in my 20s.
Scratch that, I always feel too old.

That's how my next few days went - mindless reading and going through past
regrets in my hot as hell room to stave off boredom. Truly first world problems.

## hobbies (and friends)

I enjoy most of my hobbies mainly because I have fun with _other_ people. And
for me, someone who never did homework or studied, my most consistent friends
are people located in Eurasia that I've never met before. Get out of school at
3? That's prime gaming time for people in that region, then when they go to
sleep I get to play with my irl friends.

The difference between this is that bonds formed with irl friends are formed and
unformed in real life while those online are done there. When we switch schools,
go to university, relocate, irl relationships are subject to distance decay. I
have many irl friends, but only in name and mainly because I don't have the
heart to call them ex friends. On the other hand, I've been able to maintain a
stable relationship with numerous people that I've only strictly known online -
moving between various chatting applications - Ventrilo, RaidCall, TeamSpeak,
and now Discord over the past 10+ years.

I've (consciously or unconsciously) moved to making friends strictly online
because of this reason - and (I'd say) reasonably so. Of course, this is also
what opens me up to the possibility of extreme boredom when the power goes out.
Is it reasonable to expect the power to commonly be out for several weeks at a
time?

There are at least 2 activities that I like that are not computer dependent
(although I realize that I do or did _some_ computer equivalent versions of
them). The first one is playing music - I think I would enjoy playing the violin
part of a duet with someone if it was casual (_cough_ not like when I was
eventually forced to keep practicing violin _cough_). This is kind of covered
because I ended up "learning" to play a bastard version of a piano online using
a keyboard and played music with friends who also did the same thing.

The second one would be playing board games. I figure "board games" is quite a
broad category but I mean most board games out there - classic straightforward
ones like chess, checkers or tsuro up to moderately complex ones like Betrayal
at House on the Hill or Eldritch Horror. The online replacement would be
Tabletop Simulator - a physical sandbox literally designed for tabletop (board)
games.

Aghhh! It seems so difficult to find an irl friend that will share overlapping
interests compared to an online one. Why bother when it's so much easier to do
online? Perhaps finding an irl friend is easier to do online than irl.

> "Looking for someone who likes board games and will play musical duets with
> me... in my immediate area"

Wait, this sounds like the start of a profile description for a dating website.
I guess I enjoy long walks on the beach, too. No computer replacement for that.

The internet is both a blessing and curse for relationships.
