# count elements in a list

One of my recent powerless nights, I was thinking about determining the
theoretical limit of a problem compared to the book answer given for a problem.
Is it possible that I could one day poke a hole in a LeetCode:tm: problem during
an interview using this?

What's the theoretical limit for counting the number of occurences of an element
in a list? $O(n)$ because you have to consider every element.

What if the list is sorted? Same idea? No because you could find the first and last
elements and subtract the positions to get how many are in between. And now writing
this, I'm not sure what a solid way to descibe the theoretcal lower bound for this
would be. How to find an element such that at least the element to the left or right
of it is not equivalent? One idea would be having to look at consecutive pairs that
include the wanted element. However, there are $O(n)$ pairs and we really only care
about the first and the last ones.

What I realized was you could do a modified binary search to find the first occurence,
then do some modified binary subsearches to find the first and last element. But
is this truly the most efficient solution out there? And does it even work? I'm
not going to bother checking it but it sounds solid. I don't even know the theoretical
lower bound for it.

Long story short, I realized it was probably a lot harder to do this than just solve
the problem normally. How do I know when to stop optimizing a solution? When the
interviewer says so. How does the interviewer know when to stop optimizing the solution?
Because the answer key says so. How does the answer key know? ???.

Probably because a few smart guys worked on it for several days. Meanwhile I have
15 minutes. God I used to enjoy doing these casually as a puzzle now and then but
ever since interviews... When things get incorporated into work I seem to lose passion.
