# yet another life introspective

I swear I'll stop writing so many non-technical things. Soon.

Something funny happened over the past few weeks - I've literally lost all
interest in my past hobbies. Video games, watching videos, etc. all do not give
me any sense of happiness anymore.

Nowadays my days follow a pretty set schedule: working between 8-4 or 9-5
depending on when I feel like starting work, then heading out for a 2 hour+ walk
around the neighborhood, then maybe dinner, and finally wasting away until bed
time.

The funny thing is I don't feel as poor as before, I'm just straight up bored.
The walks are pretty good as a time filler as I get lost in thought and time
passes quickly. Oh, the exercise is good for me, too, I guess.

As for wasting time away, unfortunately it seems that reaching out to people a
few years after not talking through email is not a good method. Well maybe they
died of Covid, who knows? Kind of like when some of my online friends say "See
you tomorrow" and I never see them ever again. I'm kind of falling into that
category as I realized it was the common interest in video games and things that
supported most of my online friendships and, without any interest from me, they
are slowly crumbling.

I also decided to practice a few languages through Duolingo (not sponsored btw).
Spanish to make up for my two C's in Spanish 2 and 3 (was one of them a D? I
don't remember, how do you learn a language without studying anyways) and
Chinese because... take a guess. No doubt there is some hubbub around the
effectiveness of Duolingo, but I think it suits my needs which is just to learn
vocabulary. Unfortunately their placement tests seems to be suited towards
beginners and only places more advanced users so far - right now I'm stuck
learning things I already know despite more or less perfect scores on those
tests. Oh well, a review isn't too bad.

I think I'm also planning to purchase some violin stuff to play again. Did I
already mention this before or was it just on my mind for a while? Is this the
Covid brain fog that people talk about? Probably not, I think general confusion
about myself is just one of my characteristics.

Overall, I like to think that I must've lucked out somehow. Spending over a
decade in front of a computer for 8-10 hours a day must have finally reduced any
fun I get out of doing so. And now as a "young adult" I get to spend my time
doing more productive activities like exercising, practicing foreign languages,
and playing instruments? Well I write these too, it's pretty fun - but most of
the thinking for the writing actually happens during walks. So maybe I won't
stop writing these that soon.
