# learning haskell

I've decided to go ahead and learn a new programming language - and not one that
is similar to most other oop languages - Haskell. I have dabbled in it here and
there thanks to influences from other people I hang around with but I've never
really gotten into it.

Why?

1. Functional - I've come to appreciate functional programming
2. No boilerplate - a lot of the Haskell code I've seen does away with a lot of
   boilerplate that you can find in other languages.
3. Statically typed
4. Sound smart

Naturally, because I don't know much about Haskell right now, I cannot give a
solid list of reasons. So I guess if I wanted to give reasons for learning
Haskell, I would have to learn about it first. Quite interesting.

Also it gives me something to write about, and I don't want to write about work
for now.

I've read up to the Modules chapter in `learnyouahaskell`. So far, everything
has been a refresher but it was good to re-experience the syntax again. I'll
actually focus on restyling this page now because it looks ugly to me. And I
don't usually care much for appearances.

But before I go, I'd like to point out that I've already come across a case
where Haskell does away with boilerplate.

> make a new list where each element is the sum of the previous elements. For
> example, `[3, 3, 2, 3, 4, 3] => [3, 6, 8, 11, 15, 18]`.

For an oop language you might find something like this

```java
int[] events = [3, 3, 2, 3, 4, 3];
int[] summed = new int[events.length];
summed[0] = events[0];
for (int i = 1; i < events.length; i++) {
    summed[i] = summed[i - 1] + events[i];
}
```

For Haskell you could do this

```haskell
let events = [3, 3, 2, 3, 4, 3] in scanl1 (+) events
```

The existence of various built in methods that don't appear in other languages
are great.
