# an amazon recruiter conversation

*Email names/wording are modified for privacy*

Recently I received an email from an Amazon recruiter out of the blue.

> My name is R, and I am an Engineering Recruiter for Amazon’s Amazon Web Services
> (AWS).  After reading through your profile, I wanted to reach out to you today.
> Today I am reaching out because I’m looking for Software Development Engineer
> (SDE)’s for various locations.
>
> We have pre-scheduled interview slots that are coming up, and as I read through
> your profile, I wanted to make sure you were considered for one of our opportunities.
> If you are interested in learning more about some of these opportunities, I’d
> like to move you to our next step of the process.  Please let me know if you are
> interested.
>
> I appreciate your time, and I do hope to hear back from you.  Please let me know
> if you have any questions.  Thanks!

The first thing that caught my attention is that I have an actual profile out there
and that this was sent to a specific email that I used several years ago. The significance
of the email is that I use many emails set up in a tree like structure, such that
all emails are forwarded to the root email, I create new emails that forward to
the root and periodically nest the tree under a new root email. This means I have
a general idea of where someone got an email based on the receiver - in this case
the email was from a few years ago and job search related, interesting.

Furthermore, I (kind of) meticulously scrub my data after my search is finished
which technically should leave no information online anymore, but as we all know
it's still out there somewhere and I was curious to know where so I could delete
it.

Another thing I noted is that this message used two spaces after every period, which
suggested that it was manually typed up by an older person and not a template. I
also took the liberty of looking up the recruiter on LinkedIn and it looks like
he's been doing technical recruiting for a couple decades but moved to at Amazon
recently.

Also, the email was sent at around 12am west coast time. I figure he's trying to
meet some kind of deadline for filling up the candidate pipeline and I might as well
see if I can help somehow even if I'm not really interested.

Because of these things, and the fact that I'm pretty starved socially (maybe enough
to try to start a casual conversation with a *recruiter*, see previous posts), I
decided to respond.

> Thanks for reaching out. I'm not actively looking for a new position at the moment
> but might be interested in a change under the right circumstances. Any information
> about the opportunities would be greatly appreciated.
>
> My only specific question at the moment is what profile did you read?

The response:

> Thanks for the response.  I saw both profile in a job site, and also looking at
> an old resume of yours.  Based on that, made me want to try and reach out. Wasn’t
> sure what you’ve been doing since, or if it be a fit…but never hurts to try.
>
> I work with a few different teams, mostly an innovation SDE team within Amazon’s
> AWS.  Below I’m including an example of a job description.
>
> Job Description: [url](https://www.amazon.jobs/en/jobs/1237225/software-development-engineer)
>
> If you have gone the SDE path, and you feel there is a fit and interest, let me
> know.  I’d be happy to start the process.  Or talk more about it.

Hmm, unfortunately no specific info on where the profile is, but what I did learn
is that Amazon somehow has one of my old resumes on file. I don't remember applying
for any jobs at Amazon before so I went to look at any past emails. Turns out I
had another Amazon recruiter contact me a few years back.

> I'd like to consider you for a full-time Software Development Engineering role
> with our People Technology team at Amazon! We are looking for an enthusiastic
> technologist with experience building global software solutions at massive scale.
> As a key member of our Analytics and ML technology team, you’ll work closely along
> with our Principle SDE and Sr. Engineers in designing a strategy to detect and
> correct errors in existing and new Time and Attendance systems. In this role,
> you’ll have the opportunity to have a global impact on a Greenfield project involving
> cutting-edge AWS technologies, data analytics, and machine learning. If you’re
> an Engineer who can take a complicated problem, Think Big, Invent and Simplify,
> and deliver it to Production with full autonomy, then this is the place for you!
>
> If you’re interested in being considered, please send along your resume. I will
> personally review your resume along with the hiring team and follow up with next
> steps.

Decided to look at this person's LinkedIn now, and it looks like they've since moved
from Amazon and are now a sr techincal recruiter at Facebook. The interesting thing
here is that he was asking for a resume, and I never responded - so I don't think
this is how Amazon picked up one of my old resumes. So then where did they get it?
Privacy leak nightmare, I suppose - most job search websites seem to be extremely
shady and spam you with "job" opportunities; I wouldn't be surprised if they sold
my resume.

Anyways, back to the recent recruiter, here's a the job description in case it ever
changed or the url dies:

> DESCRIPTION
>
> We believe the revolution enabled by internet-connected “smart” devices is just
> beginning, and we see a bright future for those that transform their business
> to leverage them. Our customer-obsessed DNA is leading us to meet the people and
> businesses sharing that vision, and ready to tackle the challenge.
>
> Join our team as we build brand-new solutions for smart energy, unlocking the
> potential of machine learning and IoT to meet the demands of tomorrow’s net carbon
> zero market. We work closely with global customers to transform power grids to
> support renewable energy sources, electric vehicles, and sustainable capacity
> optimizations. We are passionate about delivering massive improvements to grid
> efficiency and reductions in clean energy capital expenditures, leading to reduced
> consumer costs and a better, “greener” overall system to support the ever-increasing
> energy demand world-wide
>
> AWS is looking for an experienced Software Development Engineer obsessed with
> customer success, passionate about simplification and design-thinking, and excited
> to dive deep into an opportunity to change the way the world moves with new products
> for the energy industry. We build services that operate at massive scale, ingesting
> high-frequency data with consistently low latency, but our solutions span
> end-to-end, so we also tackle edge computing, network communications, system design,
> applied science, machine-learning, and human/computer interaction.
>
> Our team is intentional about attracting, developing, and retaining amazing talent
> from diverse backgrounds. We cultivate a welcoming and inclusive culture, and
> recognize the importance of a good work/life balance, with flexible schedules
> and work-at-home options depending upon the role. Team members bring a wide range
> of skill sets and experience levels, providing both growth and mentoring opportunities
> for new members.
>
> Here at AWS, we embrace our differences. We are committed to furthering our culture
> of inclusion. We have ten employee-led affinity groups, reaching 40,000 employees
> in over 190 chapters globally. We have innovative benefit offerings, and we host
> annual and ongoing learning experiences, including our Conversations on Race and
> Ethnicity (CORE) and AmazeCon (gender diversity) conferences. Amazon’s culture
> of inclusion is reinforced within our 14 Leadership Principles, which remind team
> members to seek diverse perspectives, learn and be curious, and earn trust.
>
> If you are interested in being part of the future of in energy distribution and
> relate to Amazon's Leadership Principles [url](https://www.amazon.jobs/principles),
> please apply: we would love to explore opportunities for you on our team.
>
> BASIC QUALIFICATIONS
>
> - 3+ years of non-internship professional software-development experience
> - 2+ years programming experience with at least one modern language such as Java,
>   C++, or C# including object-oriented design
> - 1+ years of experience contributing to the architecture and design (architecture,
>   design patterns, reliability and scaling) of new current systems
>
> PREFERRED QUALIFICATIONS
>
> - Strong knowledge of Computer Science fundamentals in object-oriented design,
>   data structures, algorithm design, problem solving, and complexity analysis
> - Knowledge of, at least, one modern programming language such as C, C++, Java,
>   or Perl
> - Experience building complex software systems that have been successfully delivered
>   to customers
> - Knowledge of professional software engineering practices & best practices for
>   the full software development life cycle, including coding standards, code reviews,
>   source control management, build processes, testing, and operations
> - Ability to take a project from scoping requirements through actual launch of
>   the project
> - Experience in communicating with users, other technical teams, and management
>   to collect requirements, describe software product features, and technical designs
> - Meets/exceeds Amazon’s leadership principles requirements for this role
> - Meets/exceeds Amazon’s functional/technical depth and complexity for this role

"Join our team as we build brand-new solutions for smart energy, unlocking the potential
of machine learning and IoT to meet the demands of tomorrow’s net carbon zero
market." Hmm, yes, pitching a job related to the environment is a good way to hook
zoomers i.e. me, I guess. Unfortunately I failed to see the connection between AWS
and this and mentioned so in my response. I assumed it was like professional/managed
services for energy sector customers. I don't really know much of AWS outside of
the fact that it provides computing resources/platforms.

> Haha, a resume from YYYY or before sounds about right and yes, I've been doing
> software engineering work since then.
>
> Working on improving energy efficiency sounds interesting and meaningful to me
> but I don't necessarily see the connection to AWS. Could you elaborate on the
> job description?
>
> I see this is a Seattle based position, are there any other options? Full disclosure,
> my current job is fully remote (although coincidentally also has an office in Seattle)
> with flexible hours, and I am a little averse towards relocating at the moment.
> Other than that, I just have a general set of questions that I usually like to
> learn about any new opportunities:
>
> - Locations/remote work policy
> - Work life balance
> - Engineering culture
>   - How much time is spent between meeting/working for engineers/what periodic
>     meetings are there
>   - How is work planned and distributed to the team?
>   - Overall process from writing code to landing it in production (tests, code
>     review, etc)
>   - Team/management structure
>   - Some real examples of bugs/features that are being worked
>   - Any on-call responsibilities
>   - Mentorship and knowledge transfer
>   - Visibility of non-engineering departments
> - Compensation
>
> If it's easier to get these answered by starting the process, then sign me up.

Before sending this response, I already erred towards not going for the opportunity
as it seemed like too much of a hastle for a small bump in compensation for a lot
lower quality of life and the actual work was still unclear. For these reasons,
I decided to lay out my hand with the full disclosure sentence.

Well, I think I showed too much and the recruiter never responded. Which kind of
sucks because I wanted to talk to someone at AWS and ask why it's so hard to figure
out a list of services you're running before you get billed, especially when one
of the core values is Customer Obsessed. Let's be honest, it's because they make
more money this way. In fact, based on my experience, maybe people are happier when
they ask for and get the refund compared to never having to ask for it in the first
place - creating fake friction which they can easily solve. And then there would
be people who are (over)billed and say nothing.

Disclaimer: he did eventually respond and I may update this

## full experience

Well, since it's the Friday of the week that I was supposed to have the final interview
and I had sent an email over a week ago with no follow up, let's take a slightly
more detailed look at what happened and some random thoughts I had along the way.

October 5, I receive the first email from the recruiter, which is quoted above.
October 5, I respond (because I keep a tight watch over my emails). October 5, He
responds about where he found my resume and such. October 5, I respond.

These 4 emails and my thoughts are the ones outlined above, after which I received
no response until October 14th, where the recruiter says he did not see his email
and avoids answering my questions by saying the answers are team specific, which
I find reasonable, and asks again if I'm interested.

> I was about to check in and see if you had responded, and just noticing that you
> had responded, I just hadn’t answered your email.  I do apologize, not sure how
> I missed your email.
>
> I think the teams I work with are working on very exciting and innovative things,
> like the energy efficiency team.  The role is not necessary in Seattle, we have
> locations in San Francisco and Austin.  Maybe some remote/virtual, but those would
> depend on the actual teams.  But we do have them.
>
> In regards to the question, they vary depend on the teams and projects that they
> are assigned.  These are questions that we can make sure you get answers to during
> an interview.
>
> Let me know if you are interested.  The next part of the process is a technical
> assessment, I know this is common in other teach companies.  However, I would
> spend some time with you beforehand to help you prepare for it.  I see my role
> being your advocate, so would want to make sure you do well in it.

I respond on October 15th, saying it's not a problem because recruiters work with
many candidates a lot of the time and some are bound to fall through the cracks.
Also I candidly (?) make a joke that he had ghosted me. I also try to start a discussion
on remote policies as Amazon had recently revised their wfh plan between our last
correspondence. I decide to go ahead with the process but let him know that I'm
currently on-call and may have to drop any scheduled processes if something at my
work blows up.

Ok, then on October 18th I receive a few links - a couple for an online exam, and
a ton of interview prep things along with a one week deadline. I'll summarize what
was given below:

- Preparation Resources:
  - HackerRank Test tips: https://www.hackerrank.com/tests/info/interface
  - HackerRank Demo Test: https://www.hackerrank.com/test/some/link
  - Project Euler - http://projecteuler.net/. If you’ve been out of practice, do
    up to problem 60 or so. You should be forced to build useful libraries, which
    will help give practical experience for interview like problems. Don’t cheat
    or take shortcuts.
  - Google Coding Contest has additional practice questions: https://codingcompetitions.withgoogle.com/codejam/archive/2020
  - Understand high scale architecture. Go look at how other big sites are structured:
    http://highscalability.com/blog/category/example
  - Fundamentals: Go back and re-educate yourself on all data structures and data
    structure algorithms. They come up all the time. Understand all time and space
    complexity. Make sure you even get into more exotic things like hashmaps, b+trees
    (and variants), caches (and associated algorithms). You may want to visit
    www.codechef.com or MYCODESCHOOL : https://www.youtube.com/user/mycodeschool

My god, all these resources and I've just started? Well little does he know I used
to do competitive programming and programming puzzles as a hobby a long time ago.
Combined with the fact that I also tutored ds & algo for several semesters in uni,
I have a pretty solid grasp over these things without any preparation despite not
having done any of these activities seriously for the past couple years. My weakest
point is probably the architectural things but that's mainly because I'm not sure
if my ideas are "good". I do have various ideas from a basic understanding of how
things work and from stuff I've read. As for the assessments themselves:

- The technical section itself is 120 minutes to complete 2 coding challenges and
  coding approach. The time remaining will be clearly displayed in the left hand
  corner of the screen throughout the test.
- Cultural section has two parts to it, slider questions and multiple choice questions.
  As mention above, because the Amazon Leadership Principles are very important
  to what we do, keep those in mind as you answer these questions.
  - Slider questions must be completed.  There are 50 questions, and can not be
    left blank.
  - FYI: There are 40 questions that are multiple choice.  If you don’t have time
    with the multiple choice section, you can leave these blank.
  - The purpose of this section is to understand the cultural compatibility with
    Amazon and AWS.
  - This section is not timed.

Ok, so a timed coding section and some cultural thing? I ended up doing no prep
because of time constraints but was able to find an open slot on October 21 to
finish at least the coding section. The questions were pretty simple, I spent
5 minutes on the first question and 30 minutes on the second - I think I got
an ideal solution for the second, but for the first one I would've needed to be
able to keep referenced to individual nodes in a linked list which I think means
I had to write my own implementation, which I opted not to and just gave a suboptimal
solution by scanning an array with build in methods.

The interesting part is the "cultural" section. I think it was less cultural and
a combination of technical and competency. The technical part was about choosing
various technologies to do things like k/v vs relational database vs something like
elasticsearch for storing images, or what are some good things to help detect/fix
issues in your application (monitoring, scripts to fix stuff, etc). The problem
was a lot of the answers were realy "it depends", but since that wasn't a choice,
I just went with whatever I figured was best. The other part was more or less a
work simulation where you answer how you react in certain scenarios, ok no too bad.

Overall, I think I took a little under an hour total for both parts. Speed is my
specialty.

Then I get an email at 12:01 AM (my time) on October 22 congratulating me on passing
and to set up a phone interview. I literally thought it was ops genie paging me
at first because it was that late and I assumed any notification was an alert. Is
it an automated system of some kind? Well, I respond in the morning and realize
I'm setting up a call to discuss what's going to be on the phone interview... What's
wrong with just the email packet? Well, some scheduling problems happen because
the recruiter had a doctors appointment but we eventually get on a call. It's just
a simple discussion but I note that he is coughing a lot (Covid?). He then sends
me a ton more resources and what might be covered:

- The phone screen will be one hour in duration. They will ask behavioral questions
  surrounding the leadership principles.
- Some general coding interview tips like resolving any ambiguities about the question
- A worksheet where you can come up with examples of *each* of Amazon's 14 leadership
  principles (!)

The recruiter kept emphrasizing that I should have 2 stories for each of the leadership
principles beforehand to pull on. Holy crap, 28 stories? For a phone interview?
Well, I put like 5 minutes work in before I knew it was moot, because in general
the only stories I have are the very big fancy ones so I only came up with like
3 or 4, most of which are readable via the other posts. I decided to say screw it
and wing it like every other interview I do. Although I did make the decision to
call up the recruiter for a casual chat using the fact that I couldn't come up with
stories as an excuse. And now I was sent a link to a calendar type app to schedule
the interview and set it up for November 3rd.

A day or so before the interview, I looked over the link and realize it has a link
to a job description attached to it. And that job was entirely different from the
one originally shown, and had a very generic description.

> The AWS Worldwide Revenue Operations (WWRO) team is a centralized AWS sales operation
> function. WWRO is responsible for operational activities spanning from management
> of compensation policies to building enterprise-scale tooling for customer management
> and business insight. The mission of WWRO is to make the AWS seller organization
> the most efficient in the world, where sellers focus the majority of their time
> on customers. We do this by investing in integrated experiences for sellers, high
> bar security practices, deep telemetry and metrics, and the tools and resources
> that sellers need to efficiently do their jobs. We consider it our job to understand,
> coordinate, and help improve the operations work being done across the AWS seller
> organization.
>
> We are a growing organization tasked with solving complex business problems by
> building scalable engineering solutions to give AWS sellers the biggest competitive
> advantage. We encourage and support our engineers to think big and innovate on
> behalf of our customers.
>
> Learn and Be Curious. We have a formal mentor search application that lets you
> find a mentor that works best for you based on location, job family, job level
> etc. Your manager can also help you find a mentor or two, because two is better
> than one. In addition to formal mentors, we work and train together so that we
> are always learning from one another, and we celebrate and support the career
> progression of our team members.
>
> Here at AWS, we embrace our differences. We are committed to furthering our culture
> of inclusion. We have ten employee-led affinity groups, reaching 40,000 employees
> in over 190 chapters globally. We have innovative benefit offerings, and we host
> annual and ongoing learning experiences, including our Conversations on Race and
> Ethnicity (CORE) and AmazeCon (gender diversity) conferences. Amazon’s culture
> of inclusion is reinforced within our 14 Leadership Principles, which remind team
> members to seek diverse perspectives, learn and be curious, and earn trust.
>
> Our team also puts a high value on work-life balance. Striking a healthy balance
> between your personal and professional life is crucial to your happiness and success
> here, which is why we aren’t focused on how many hours you spend at work or online.
> Instead, we’re happy to offer a flexible schedule so you can have a more productive
> and well-balanced life—both in and outside of work.

Oh boy, what have I gotten myself into? Well, I figured I could learn more about
the job and get my original questions answered in this interview. I go to the interview
on Chime but in the beginning have trouble getting my external camera to work.
I spent probably 15 minutes trying to figure this out, and ended up eating into the
interview time despite joining early. It turns out that my privacy controls somehow
make Chime not happy, so I had to disable a lot of them... and also use my laptop's
built-in camera. The interviewing engineer was patiently (I assume) waiting. Oh
well, I get the question and type up an answer. The question is one of the one in
[exercises](/exercises). I think I finished in less than 10 minutes. She mentions
no one has finished so quickly and I've probably passed as long as the recruiter
likes the feedback she would pass along (why would the recruiter have a say on the
technical aspect?) Turns out there is nothing else to the interview so I'm free
to ask questions with the 45 minutes left. I quickly learn that the engineer interviewing
me is on-call, isn't even on the team that I'm being pushed towards, and can't answer
any of my questions. I do a quick search on her and find out she's been at Amazon
for 5 years, spending 3 years on one team and 2 on her current one. That's a pretty
long tenure for Amazon. I end up chatting with her about Amazon's remote policies,
high turnover rate, and some general things like being on-call. I decide to end
the meeting after 15 or so more minutes and comment that it's always great when
meetings go under their planned duration and wish her a good lunch.

November 8 rolls around and I get a response from the recruiter.

> I hope you had a great weekend. I’ve received feedback from the Phone Interview
> and it looks great.  Wanted to check in with you to diuscuss next steps and scheduling
> an on-site (virtual) interview. Let me know if you have time to talk today or
> tomorrow. Let me know what your availability looks like.

I give him some pretty large time periods for when I'm available because full remote
benefits, but also express my concern about not knowing what the job actually entails
due to the super generic description.

He responds on November 10th, and gives me some solid project examples for various
teams, but not the one that the job description was for. We end up on an interesting
call which actually ends up being the final bit of communication. I opened up the
call by saying I still do not know what the job entails, and then I have to tell
him that it was about the WWRO organization. Then he sets some tentative dates for
the final interview (December 1st) and goes over the format which is like 6-8 interviewers
for a total of 4-5 hours. He also mentions some weekly call where I can ask questions
that I might have about the final interview process. Talk about complex. At this
point I'm pretty invested (as in I've made it this far with no prep, might as well
yolo the last interview too) and say ok, let's do it. And that's really the last
time I heard from him. I sent a follow up email on November 17th but have received
nothing.

Overall? I think it was a neutral or neutral/bad experience, mainly because of the
ghosting in the end. If I did put as much preparation as the recruiter was pushing
me to put in, then it would definitely be very bad. I estimate my time spent to be
around 4 hours - 1.5 hours for the interviews, 1 hour for my call to the recruiter
for a casual chat, 1 hour for the recruiter calling me to set things up, and 30 minutes
for emailing and other stuff. That's like $300-$400 that Amazon owes me!

A funny but dark joke I thought of one day was that maybe I was literally
ghosted - couple the fact that on all of our calls the recruiter coughed a lot,
had a doctor's visit a few weeks back, and we're in a pandemic... yes maybe that
was the case. No offense of course, I'm just making a hypothesis based on some random
observations I made.

