# thoughts on data migration Andy normalization

Man, can't use slashes in file names. We recently finished a pretty big data migration
and I had some... *thoughts* throughout the process. I'm told the entire thing was
in the works for a few years, and I was there for the last 6 months.

To lay out a scenario that is only barely related by usage, imagine you run a media
hosting service and allow people to add one tag to what they upload to identify it.

<!-- markdownlint-disable line-length -->
```sql
create table video (id uuid primary key, data blob, name text, description text, label text);
create table image (id uuid primary key, data blob, name text, description text, label text);
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable line-length -->

Hmm why isn't it just one table with a media type column? I guess it's possible but
that's not the point here. Also let's say you kind of already have a `tag` table
which is what the labels should be referencing. Because it's used in some other
part of the hosting application.

```sql
create table tag (id uuid primary key, name text, description text, label text);
```

And due to microservice architecture the tag table is in a different database than
the `video` and `image` tables. The first step that was done was to add the `labelIds`
column to the tables. It's basically a normalization operation but reminder that
they can't be foreign key references because this is between databases.

```sql
alter table video add column tagId uuid;
alter table image add column tagId uuid;
```

This is a simple and straightforward move. However, what was implemented next was
an issue. The engineer in charge of the backend changes went ahead and implemented
a kind of double write logic like so (ignore edge cases like empty strings and such,
also disclaimer I rarely write Java without the help of an IDE):

<!-- markdownlint-disable line-length -->
```java
public Video updateVideo(VideoData videoData) {
    final var oldVideoData = mediaDb.getVideo(videoData.id);

    // either add a matching tag or update the referenced tag
    final var referencedTag = oldVideoData.tagId
        .map(tagId ->
            // update the referenced tag
            tagService.updateTag(tagId, videoData.title, videoData.description, videoData.label);
        )
        .orElseGet(() ->
            tagService.createTag(videoData.title, videoData.description, videoData.label);
        );

    videoData.tagId = referencedTag.id;

    mediaDb.updateVideo(videoData.id, videoData);
}
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable line-length -->

So any time the video or image is updated, it updates the tag that's referenced.
Sound good? It shouldn't when you realize that the title of the tag is kept in sync
with the last video that references it is updated. For example we have two videos
called V1 and V2 that reference tag T1. Whenever you update V1 the name of the tag
gets updated to V1 and the same thing for V2.

The double write was weird and I eventually came across it and had to remove it.
Furthermore, it there was another bug where tags with the same label kept being created.
And the most egregious issue was that there was nothing preventing you from updating
the tag - you could update the tag's label and then `video.label` and `tag.label`
are no long in sync. This still causes us small amounts of pain as parts of the
frontend still referenced `video.label`.

At this point I should mention I mainly did frontend logic around updating tag creation
and display so some of these issues are on me. The first issue I ran into was a
null pointer issue. The backend engineer updated the `Video` object to include the
`tag` property which would hold the entire `tag` object and I updated the frontend
types and relied on this to pull data whenever I wrote new logic. How was it implemented
in the backend? At the end of any request that returned `Video`(s), he would call
a function like `attachTag` so instead of `return video` it became `return attachTag(video)`.
The issue here? He missed a lot of spots and when the frontend received the `Video`
data and tried to access `video.tag.label`, it became a null pointer. I asked them
to fix it but it never was and I ended up just never relying on it. Instead, I had
the frontend call out to tag service based on logic to fetch relevant tags. Also
due to how some views were designed you could update the tag while viewing a video
which meant the tag object on the video was out of date unless you wanted some more
double write logic for the frontend... bleh.

Well, enough complaining about the backend for now so I'll complain about my own
work. We needed frontend changes that could support adding tags the old way and
the new way depending on if it a video or image already references one. Also we only
had one app wide toggle to control various features so we couldn't turn things on
for individual customers without extreme pains (basically override for each customer
at a time in a configuration file). The issue here was we didn't want give anyone
access to the new ui without having fully done the migration. So the steps should
be:

1. Can add labels normally, text only
2. Run big migration
3. Can only add/edit attached tag

The question is what do we hide behind the toggle? To me, it seemed like we want
to hide the add tag controls behind the toggle but then force people to add tags
for anything new but be able to edit "legacy" labels.

1. Can add labels normally
2. Flip feature
3. Can edit labels normally, or add/edit attached tag
4. Run big migration
5. Can only add/edit attached tag (no more legacy labels)

I ran the logic by several times and got it OK'd but several weeks in it go NOK'd
because the PM didn't want to force adding a tag to non-legacy media. I ended up
writing the same thing but reversed: can add labels normally but if something references
a tag you can only edit the tag. Then the toggle determines if you can add
labels/add tags.

1. Can add labels normally, edit tags if referenced
2. Run big migration
3. Flip feature
4. Can only add/edit attached tag (no more legacy labels)

Seem solid? Well, there is a step in between 2 and 3, called 2.5: users can create
legacy labels and we need to rerun the migration. I brought it up but the suggested
solution was to just run the migration as step 2.6. I'm not sure if cared when I
pointed out we might be stuck in between steps 2.5 and 2.6 and should think about
reordering the steps. Well, in hindsight this was fine and caused no issues but still.

But to bring back my backend complaining, we didn't want to show the controls yet,
specifically "1. ...edit tags if referenced" wasn't supposed to happen because the
logic that generated tags was already in production and checking the production
database showed many tags created this way. Yes, things were a little dire to me
at least.

Well, migration day was coming and it turns out backend engineer person who has
been working on this since years ago suddenly announces he's leaving for a crypto
company. Before migration day. Oh boy, I'm not sure if it was a coincidence or if
he didn't want to be here for the potential clusterfuck.

Either way, we went through the migration which was more or less straightforward.
We wrote endpoints to collect the unique labels for customers and generate tags
and referenced the generated tags. There was a small bit of manual work/custom logic
for consolidating similar tags with things like case sensitivity and another slightly
complex point I'm leaving out because it makes no sense in the made up tag scenario.
Everything came out ok, and I overworried for nothing.

But to finish off, I mentioned earlier that we still have frontend pains around
`video.label` still being referenced. And I was on frontend duty so this is kind
my fault. I spent all of my time making sure the Video and Image pages were working,
but it turns out that the `Video` and `Image` objects were used on other pages and
those pages still referenced the old `label` field, and as I pointed out earlier
there is no guarantee that this is synced with the tag's label and gives incorrect
info.

I also have a sneaking suspicion this might also be the case on the backend, but
I haven't looked. However, it might not be because the backend types are a lot more
solid (Java) than what the frontend has (a combination of JavaScript/TypeScript).
And I know there's a method that works like:

```java
public String getLabel(Video video) {
    return video.tag.map(tag -> tag.label).orElse(video.label);
}
```

That's used in various spots. Hopefully it's been plugged in better than `attachTag`
although it depends on it...
