# email organization for privacy enthusiasts

Me, I'm the privacy enthusiast. I originally wanted to say paranoid people but I
figured calling myself paranoid wasn't an good look for me.

I think the first personal email I had was back around 2005. It was one in a
group of emails provided to my family by our then internet provider, as it was
hosted on under their domain. I didn't really use it at the time, as I was too
young to really know how important it could be. My main memory of using that
email is when a good friend of mine started sending me spam, and I had the
audacity to (jokingly) type loudly at him in a reply. Back then I wasn't really
aware of people getting hacked and stuff.

However, once I got into the seedy side of gaming, I realized I needed more
emails when I received my first ban. This is when I came across the concept of
disposable/ temporary emails. This was quite useful as most services at the time
didn't seem to have white/blacklists that prevented you from signing up with a
shady looking address. I must've made a few hundred emails this way and used
them for various reasons, but I eventually came to the conclusion this wasn't
ideal as the emails were public as long as anyone knew the username and they
couldn't be used reliably - numerous times I tried to work around various game
account issues only to be shut down because the email used to register the
account was no longer accessible to me.

Then, I turned to Big Tech. Ehh, just hotmail, gmail, and yahoo. I had the
ability to create persistent personal emails at virtually no cost - quite
amazing really. I originally started out with several independent emails on
these services like so:

$$
\begin{tikzpicture}[nodes={draw, circle, minimum size=0.75cm}, -, node distance=3cm]
  \node [] (a) {a};
  \node [right of = a] (b) {b};
  \node [right of = b] (c) {c};
  \node [right of = c] (d) {d};
\end{tikzpicture}
$$

I would check each email individually when I needed to, and it was nice.
However, as you may guess, I eventually have a few dozen emails sitting around
and end up getting in a state where I have to check them periodically. This was
too much work, so I ended up creating a single master email to which all other
emails forward their mail:

$$
\begin{tikzpicture}[nodes={draw, circle, minimum size=0.75cm}, ->]
  \node{A}
    child{ node {a} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
    child{ node {b} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
    child{ node {c} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
    child{ node {d} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} };
\end{tikzpicture}
$$

Not bad, now I can read all my emails from `A`. Furthermore, I specifically
don't sign up for anything that I believe to be shady with this email just to
keep things nice and neat. And this is the only email that I use info close to
my real info with. The main issue now is that sometimes I have to reply to an
email, and that gets annoying. Fortunately this can be done through SMTP. But I
don't do this because I would have to add a ton of emails every time I set up a
new master and I don't have to reply too often from a non master email.

One day, I learned about the + trick, where you can add a + at the end of an
email like `me+something@gmail.com` and most services will think it's a new
email. This is nice and I used it for a while, but I realized that it doesn't
really protect you from having your email leaked online because it's pretty
straightforward to find the actual email. After doing this practice too much, I
lost track of what email did what and couldn't figure out how some emails were
receiving certain messages.

I eventually turned to making a new email for most services - which is not too
bad. In fact, I like it because I can determine what leaked my email, although
sometimes I set up an email for a specific purpose rather than a specific
service e.g. job search and when that gets leaked I have to figure out which job
site leaked it.

$$
\begin{tikzpicture}[nodes={draw, circle, minimum size=0.75cm}, -]
  \node{A}
    child{ node {a} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
    child{ node {b} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
    child{ node {c} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
    child{ node {d} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
    child{ node {e} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
    child{ node {f} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
    child{ node {g} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} };
\end{tikzpicture}
$$

But one day I decided I didn't want to use a certain email anymore because it
was spammed to hell, so I created a new master email and had `A` forward
everything but the unwanted emails.

$$
\begin{tikzpicture}[nodes={draw, circle}, -]
\node{B}
  child {
    node{A}
      child{ node {a} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {b} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {c} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {d} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {e} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {f} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {g} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
    edge from parent node[right, draw=none]{filter}
  };
\end{tikzpicture}
$$

And now when I create new emails for services, I nest them under the latest
master rather than at the bottom. This just means theres less forwarding done.

$$
\begin{tikzpicture}[nodes={draw, circle}, -]
\node{B}
  child { node {h} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
  child { node {i} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
  child {
    node{A}
      child{ node {a} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {b} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {c} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {d} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {e} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {f} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
      child{ node {g} edge from parent node[draw=none]{} }
    edge from parent node[right, draw=none]{filter}
  };
\end{tikzpicture}
$$

Now and then, I'll nest things under a new master email just to keep things
fresh, but usually only after a certain period of time has passed or I want to
"deprecate" one of my emails through a filter.

I did start having a few reservations about this setup though. The first one is
that access to a master email gives insight to a non-trivial part of my
activities because some of my emails flow through it. Although, arguably it
gives less insight than if you had everything in one account. Another problem is
that with this setup, one service going down means I lose emails from all the
ones nested below it - I haven't actually mapped out my tree of emails so I'm
not exactly sure what would be lost at a glance. Then again, losing a node in
this tree means losing less than if you lost your only email. Hmm, maybe it is
good after all.

What I've been thinking of recently is somehow encrypting the received emails so
access to any inbox wouldn't yield any information. Unfortunately this requires
the services to send the email encrypted which isn't possible in most cases, so
I've been thinking of somehow making each node encrypt the message before
forwarding it to its parent. For example if `c` received a message it would be
encrypted like `B(A(c(message)))` and I'd have to decrypt it using those keys.
But that requires having the tree mapped out. Which is actually one of my
projects that I think I'll never get around to doing, as I looked at some email
implementation details it it was pretty complex.
