# the worst projects make for the best stories

Alternative title: this writer only bitches when things go wrong.

Recently, I've been thinking of experiences I can share about working as an
software engineer. I couldn't come up with anything good and decided to take a
look back at what I've written so far. I'd categorize my posts into 3 different
categories: random experiments, random life blurbs, and work musings. I wanted
to write about professional software engineering so I took a closer look at my
work musings.

Interestingly enough, most (if not all) of these posts are kind of negative in
various ways. Is it the case that I've never had a **good** experience working
before? Definitely not, so what's up? I thought back to some of my better
projects, and realize I don't have much to actually say about them - kind of
like another day at the (virtual) office. On the other hand, if you're fighting
a fire, you come away with various lessons learned which make the experience
memorable.

One of my most impressive, smooth-sailing projects revolved around
creating/training an ml model (_cough_ basic statistics _cough_) with a few data
scientists, then setting up backend/frontend things to let users interact with
it. The project went well, we finished things ahead of deadline, released, and
users were happy. I think I'm supposed to also have some lessons learned in this
case - namely, what did we do right so that things went so smoothly.
Unfortunately the truth is we did nothing remotely revolutionary in terms of
planning or getting work done so I really can't point anything out - we just
worked as usual and things... worked. Also as a lower level individual
contributor I don't really make calls on overarching organization details
usually.

On the other hand, once I was stuck into the lead spot for a project where we
had to build an integration with one of our vendors. This one wasn't very
dumpster fire either, but there was 1 main road bump that stalled the project -
the vendor was taking forever to provision us with test credentials for their
product. And really it just required me to tell the pm the issue and she leaned
on the vendor until they did their job. Lesson learned: escalate to the right
people that can get the job done? Except that's what I did from the start, so
not really a lesson learned.

On the third hand, there are some true dumpster fires that I look back on and
pull solid lessons from. Which is probably every other work related post you'll
find here so far... although I think I never really explicitly state what the
takeaways are.

I think this is a result of my upbringing - I just don't get very excited about
the good stuff. And I think conflict is more interesting anyways, but I'd like
to emphasize that I mean it's more interesting for reading/writing - in work I'd
prefer not to stir up unnecessary conflict for the sake of interesting stories.
Perhaps these values are reflected in our society in various ways today, but
that's too philosophical for this post.

Although I did just have a pretty funny experience that I have a takeaway from
that happened literally 5-10 minutes ago involving a code review with a feature
but also a ton of random refactoring.

> person: you accepted with no comments or complaints on my pr?
>
> me: yep looks good, I just wish it wasn't 99% refactoring
>
> _10 minutes later_
>
> person: @me hey I found an issue in my pr, can you re-review it
>
> me: fffffffffffff (I let a bug through)

I think I started glazing over because most things were space/variable changes.
I already did know that it's best to separate changes with different purposes
into different pull requests. I guess I just don't push back hard enough on
small things, then again `person` is a sr engineer so maybe it's a hierarchical
thing that I unconsciously follow, as I remember being pretty strict with some
intern code a few months back...

Yeah it's not unconscious because I'm aware that I do this - assume more senior
people know what they're doing unless otherwise shown. The question is does
sticking a bunch of refactoring to 20x the amount of changes in a pull request
really worth lowering my evaluation of someone's technical skills? Maybe and
maybe not, but that could be the bias speaking.

Ok, revolution time, let's get rid of the hierarchy I guess.
