# personal yearly reflection 2

Can't believe it's been a year since I wrote the last one. I don't have any preplanned
format for these yet, but I guess it's best to take a look over some of what I wrote
last year.

### remote work

Remote work is now the norm. I used to get up at 7am to get to work at 9am. Nowadays
I wake up at 7am - 8am to start work at 8am (which is my own appointed start time).
The best part is that the time before work is spent relaxing nowadays compared to
previously where I'd be commuting to work.

I think the largest boons of remote work are the lack of commute and the fact that
I'm in a personal space while working. This means I can do things I couldn't normally
do in an office because I'm actually at home, and in general I'm just pretty comfortable
here.

### seniority

I still find myself as an early mid level engineer. I think my attitude towards
technology has changed somewhat - if you knew me maybe 2 or more years ago, you'd
know that I was constantly teaching myself the next cool thing but nowadays I just
read about them and focus on improving the skills necessary for my day job.

I feel like I'm still in a mentoring position, specifically because I own a nice
chunk of code at work so people will come to be when they have questions making
their own changes or when working with similar tools that were used for that code
since I'm pretty experienced with it.

In fact, I think I've entered a position where I do more code reviews and chatting
than writing code. That's both good and bad, as it means I'm more experienced at
picking out various issues but am also losing out on the ability to write code on
the fly - for example I can barely write Java without the help of an ide. I'm not
too worried yet though because I still have other things I can pull out without an
issue.

Communication... I don't know if I can make a call on this. I think it's better
than before but mainly because my main form of communication is text through Teams
or Slack. This might also explain the approachability change. 

### product

Huh, funny how I made all these complaints back then. In fact, I heard that the
project was scrapped which means its likely all my concerns were justified. It is
possible that it was scrapped for reasons I didn't complain about, but I don't have
the insider information on why.

### free time

Less projects, less games, less everything.

I did take to exercising regularly by running/stretching on alternate days but
on-call ruined that schedule. One week of on-call meant one week of "running" indoors
(running in place, I don't have a treadmill) which definitely did not measure up
to running outdoors as the week after I realized my stamina was killed. So that
habit was quickly dropped; moreso when it got cold and running outside gave me a
headache. I do still keep up with exercise, but I mainly do a series of
planks/crunches/pushups/running in place/jumping jacks for approximately 20 minutes
every morning a couple hours into work (hooray for wfh).

My other consistent habit is practicing a few foreign languages, namely Spanish
and Chinese. I've just hit a 75 day streak in Duolingo and am going strong. I was
originally alternating between the languages per day but realized it's probably
better to just focus on one, so I picked Spanish. Write now I have 98 crowns in
Spanish and I seem to do on average one per day, so I should be at 450 or so by
the next reflection if I keep it up.

Outside of those two things, I mainly read articles on HN and other sites; admittedly
I like to focus on discourse in the comment sections more than the articles.

Have I had a serious programming project over the last year? Not really. Just mainly
play around type things that I can't be bothered to write about.

Ah, actually I did start listening to a podcast called Software Engineer Radio which
I find pretty informative - it covers a wide variety of topics and I just skip things
I'm not interested in. I've been listening to it backwards and have just hit episode
405 which seems to be another infrastructure as code episode so I'll be listening
to that. I'm not sure how much of the talks I'm actually absorbing and how much is
in one ear and out the other, but then again that's how a lot of information goes
for me nowadays - I don't go for hard memorization but rather just exposure to a
topic so I can deep dive later when wanted.

### last year's goal summary

1. Exercise - moderate daily exercise
2. Drink water - used to with heavy exercise, not so much anymore
3. Sleep on time - great bedtime nowadays
4. New job - discussion topic
5. Grad school - discussion topic
6. Improve networking - maybe
7. Improve communication - discussed

### blog stats

Last year I wrote approximately 15 posts (note that the initial 12 posts are actually
lifted from a separate blog I kept). This year I wrote 17, which is a similar amount.
The largest change between this and last year is the category of topic that I wrote
about. Last year was mainly technical, but this year I typed around 5 posts on my
personal life. I actually like this trend, so I'll probably keep it up.

Another interesting observation is that all of the year's posts are grouped up between
July and December. There seems to be a sort of dry spell in the first half of the
year for some reason. Looking back, it does seem pretty straightforward - the first
year's gap was because this blog didn't exist then and this year's gap is because
of my poor mental state.

I also think I'm going to avoid the errata post because I'm lazy and just try to
improve the initial quality by proofreading at least once before committing.
Staritng enxt yaer tohugh, I'm too lzay to go thruogh thnigs fro now.

### pandemic

I can't even remember if this is year 1 or year 2 of the pandemic. I think this
is year 2, mainly because I believe the 19 in Covid-19 stands for 2019, although
it must've been late 2019 which is why it isn't 3 years. Who knows how this will
turn out - new variant just popped up and all that. I feel like it's going to become
endemic because people just aren't willing to play it safe.

I'm aware I had a sudden shift in my thoughts some a little under half a year ago
and I think it is caused by isolation which results from remote work and other stay
at home practices and various ongoing events. I would say depression but I don't
want to appropriate that label just in case what I was feeling doesn't actually qualify.

Anyways, it's like I said a million times before, I'm feeling lonely which is something
that I haven't felt for most of my life. Lonely enough to try to strike up a conversation
with random people I haven't spoken to in years (with minimal results). Lonely enough
to browse around various friend finder apps. But not lonely enough to compromise
my privacy by submitting personal data to actually get on those platforms. The apps
have less than minimal results, but that's probably because of my privacy restrictions.

One interesting thing I'd like to note is the effect that music has had on my psyche.
For a certain amount of time I listened to strictly instrumental songs, then I started
listening to songs with vocals in the 2010-2015 range which made me feel extra
lonely - a blast from the past I guess. But then I realized it was really just any
song with certain kinds of vocals. Anyways this feels too personal to write about
so I'll change topics here.

### new professional project

I say new project because this might be a different project at the same company
or a different project at a different company and I don't want to out myself. I
see that I wanted to tackle something highly technical and I thought this would
be it, but unfortunately it just isn't. It's a standard CRUD app but there is one
interesting part of the architecture which was already completed by the time I joined.
We might be hitting some scaling issues so maybe I'll get my wish though. I mainly
do frontend because of my js/ts experience but also do small backend work when backend
needs to pick up slack on some of the features I work on.

On the other hand I did get a couple of people who reached out to me about new opportunities,
one I've written about before which is still ongoing (?... might've ended in a ghosting
before setting up the final interview but we'll see, naturally I'll update that
post eventually) and another one today. I don't have any kind of LinkedIn or anything
out there so you may wonder who it was from. It is in fact from that senior engineer
that left for a startup I mentioned last year and the opportunity is for that startup.
Guess I networked properly after all, haha. This is also how I know the previous
project got scrapped, as that is the first thing he brought up when he emailed me.

One curiosity is how I just feel happy when someone reaches out whether it be for
a casual conversation or other reason. Probably a result of the observations I've
made in the last section.

### grad school

Applied to a two grad schools, one accepted, one no response. Which is weird because
I paid ~$80 to be ghosted by a grad school? I ended up not opting to do the program
I was accepted to though because I became disillusioned with the state of
education - namely that the most valuable thing to other people will be the label
you can apply to yourself for earning a masters at X University rather than the
things you've learned.

Anyways, I just searched the things online and learned them there for free - there
are various open courses that you can take advantage of atyour own pace. Went over
databases/networking and advanced algorithms. How much stuff am I able to recall?
Almost nothing, however some of the Software Engineering radio episodes cover these
topics and when they say something I'm often like "oh yeah, I remember reading about
this". Great!

### new goals

So what will my new goals be? I haven't thought of any way to consolidate last years
with this years. Maybe I'll keep unattained goals for 2 years or something at most
after which I can replace them, seems good for a start.

One interesting thing to note is that some of these goals are one shot while others
are consistent things I'm trying to build a habit out of, so the only things that
can be removed would be those one shot goals I've attained.

Well, at the end it's up to me so I don't have to follow any set of rules religiously.
I've decided to organize the list in the following way: this years goals, previously
missed goals, and finally previous habitual goals. I just need to hope that the
list doesn't grow too long, but at least it's organized in order of recency:

1. Fix acne
    - Something about staying at home all day gave me a mild case of acne which
      I ignored. Now it's not so mild (or at least I'd like to think so). I should
      probably do something about it.
2. Solo trip somewhere
    - I don't know, but I think I need to go out and about, and preferably on my
      own. Not to go blow my brains out in the mountains so no one finds me (dark
      joke sorry)
3. Work on social issues/volunteering
    - I used to volunteer a lot back in university. Mainly stuff like tutoring/planting
      stuff/cleaning up areas. Not sure if environmental issues fall under the umbrella
      of social issues but I'd like to work on that, or volunteer in a teaching capacity.
      Well outside of those activities I can write software although I fail to see
      the exact use for that skill without domain expertise. The main reason I don't
      volunteer nowadays is because organization is annoying. I'm sure there are
      organizations that can do the main organizing work while I do my thing, I'd
      just need to find them.
4. Set up some solid relationships
    - I need a solid friend circle. Could be real life or online, platonic or romantic.
      I don't know. I'd estimate myself to have 1 close friend right now and a handful
      of people in the 0-0.5 range which I wouldn't count as being in my inner friend
      circle.
5. Drink water (2020)
6. Improve networking (2020)
7. Improve verbal communication (2020)
8. Exercise (habitual)
9. Sleep on time (habitual)
