# use of type fields

One thing I've noticed in a few bits of code over the past few years is the use
of a `type` field to determine the true type of an object. For example, we are
working at a pet store and are tasked with creating a class to represent cats
and dogs, so we make an `Animal` class. We also determine a few properties that
both cats and dogs share and have them in that class.

```java
public enum AnimalType {
    CAT,
    DOG,
    ;
}

class Animal {
    AnimalType type;
    float price;
    int numLegs;
    int tailLength;
}
```

Ok, that's good and all. Or is it? Let's say now our pet store starts to stock
fish, how would we go about updating our code to reflect this? Well, we figure
out what kind of data we want about the fish and add `FISH` to the enum.

```java
public enum AnimalType {
    CAT,
    DOG,
    FISH,
    ;
}

class Animal {
    AnimalType type;
    float price;
    int numLegs;
    double tailLength;
    int numFins;
}
```

Hmm... immediately we should see an issue where if we use the `Animal` class to
represent a fish, `numLegs` ends up being an extraneous field. Furthermore, we
don't have any nice type checks when working with the class.

```java
if (animal.type == AnimalType.FISH) {
    // fish have legs?
    System.out.println("This fish has " + animal.numLegs + " legs!");
}
```

I think this kind of thing falls under the category of "untagged union" where we
have to use application level logic to determine the true data stored in
something, but it doesn't line up with the Wikipedia definition so I'm not so
sure. This is a simple example to see the issue, but might be harder to see when
dealing with more complex business logic. We should be interested in the proper
way to write this.

Instead of having a `type` field, we should take advantage of actual types. We
should take advantage of inheritance/polymorphism to do this; I feel like most
intro to programming classes cover this, and it's one of those things that I
never came across or thought about before my formal CS education.

```java
abstract class Animal {
    float price;
}

class Dog extends Animal {
    int numLegs;
    double tailLength;
}

class Cat extends Animal {
    int numLegs;
    double tailLength;
}

class Fish extends Animal {
    int numFins;
    double tailLength;
}
```

This is just the minimum and we can make things more complex with more layers in
the hierarchy since we see shared properties among the various subtypes, but
that's more of a judgment call or kind of a "we need more info" situation.
Either way, we can now take advantage of types.

```java
if (animal instanceof Fish) {
    // should cause compilation error
    // (I think the cast is automatic when you use instanceof?)
    System.out.println("This fish has " + animal.numLegs + " legs!");
}
```

I find this interesting because a while back I remember one of my university
colleagues was complaining about an interview question where they were asked:
"What is polymorphism?" and we all thought that was funny because not many
people were familiar with the word, but after looking it up we realized it was
just talking about things like inheritance which we were familiar with. (I still
feel like my CS vocabulary is lacking)

This isn't just limited to object oriented programming though, for example in
Haskell we can use sum types and pattern matching to achieve similar
functionality.

```hs
data Animal =
    Cat { price :: Float, numLegs :: Int } |
    Dog { price :: Float, numLegs :: Int |
    Fish { price :: Float, numFins :: Int }

getAppendages :: Animal -> Int

-- because record types automatically create getter functions
getAppendages (Cat c) = numLegs c
getAppendages (Dog d) = numLegs d
getAppendages (Fish f) = numFins f

-- or

getAppendages (Cat { numLegs = n }) = n
```

Definitely very nice.

What we should now consider is why people do use `type` fields instead of taking
advantage of actual types. My first guess is because they are used to working in
untyped languages, and therefore are used to determining what fields are valid
based on application logic.

```js
// javascript
const animal = { type: AnimalType.FISH, numFins: 2 };

if (animal.type === AnimalType.FISH) {
	// both work, despite the check, up to programmer to not mess up
	console.log(`This fish has ${animal.numFins} fins!`);
	console.log(`This fish has ${animal.numLegs} legs!`);
}
```

I do believe we could use inheritance and `instanceof` in javascript, but I'm
not sure that most code is written like that. Fortunately Typescript is smart
enough to figure out the types for you with the right type definitions.

```ts
type Animal =
	| { type: AnimalType.CAT; price: number; numLegs: number }
	| { type: AnimalType.DOG; price: number; numLegs: number }
	| { type: AnimalType.FISH; price: number; numFins: number };

if (animal.type === AnimalType.FISH) {
	// first works, second should cause an error before transpilation
	console.log(`This fish has ${animal.numFins} fins!`);
	console.log(`This fish has ${animal.numLegs} legs!`);
}
```

My other thought is around the interaction between databases and application
code; when it comes to databases, I don't think there is any true way to model
variants so you'll very often see a table with a type column with fields that
may or may not be applicable. And then if you have to manually write the
conversion methods, it's slightly easier to design a class that you can stuff
the entire row into rather than several classes to specifically pick which
fields should be taken. Of course, it might be easier to avoid this with the use
of ORMs but those kind of cause their own class of problems too.

There is also a problem around modeling these types of relationships in frontend
components which also kind of don't support true inheritance but instead rely on
composability that I half want to write something about but opted not to so I'm
just leaving this sentence as a note down here.
