# technical skills

I've been thinking about how my skills as a hobbyist software engineer and a professional
software engineer have compared to each other. In general, I think skills can be
classified into two categories: creating and understanding. These two things can
fall under the larger category of problem solving.

When I started programming, I took random snippets of code and hacked them together.
One could argue that this requires skill in both creation and understanding, as
I was creating a new program by understanding existing code and gluing pieces
together. In reality, I don't think I really understood what I the code was doing
outside of the high level picture and was only creating the code that somehow combined
various copy pasted lines. In other words, I knew a function's inputs and outputs
but didn't know the internal workings or why it worked that way (a lot of this was
around direct memory access/modification, so I was extra clueless).

Later on, I got to a point where I could't find code for things I wanted, and I
had to figure out how to do things myself. I had to go back and actually understand
what the code I had copied was doing and why it was doing it that way. This understanding
also helped me to create my own features rather than having to find and copy code
from elsewhere. Note that this specifically means I was able to write original code
to perform a task - I had no thoughts of things like performance of efficiency,
but these things would come to my attention through attending higher education.

I also have insight into other hobbyist programmers as someone who helps people
write code online. There seems to be heavy emphasis on creating over understanding
as the main ask people have is for code to solve their problems. The issue with
this is that they rely on others to supply code and always come back because they
are unable to solve their own problems. Honestly it sucks for everyone invovled
because the helper is not really helping and the helpee is just going to come back
for more code since they haven't learned anything. It's like the saying

> Give a man a fish, and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish, and you feed
> him for a lifetime.

Now, when it comes to professional software engineering, chances are that there
is already a ton of code in place and you'll have to understand it effectively
before you start doing anything else. Unfortunately due to business needs, there
is high emphasis on creating (feature work) so a lot of things are implemented without
proper understanding (and architecture). This is why a lot of codebases look like
patchwork, because there are a ton of random blobs applied without much thought
to the rest of the system. I think engineers should take the time to consider the
overall structure of their changes.

In fact, unless you are starting an entirely new tech at your company, you should
be obligated to look at design choices of other projects and understand why they
were made. However, these are not focuses that will be rewarded from a business
perspective as there is no immediate benefit. Overall, there is more emphasis on
creating than understanding which is of great detriment to future maintainers of
your code. This gets especially poor when you realize that software engineers hop
jobs very frequently, leaving behind a potential mess for the next person, and interviews
hardly test for these skills.

The interesting thing is that this "working on existing code that isn't yours" skill
really isn't emphasized at all when trying to land a job. Instead, there is higher
focus on making your own pet projects and showing those off, which is more about
creating rather than understanding. The main way to work on existing code before
starting professionally will most likely be through open source contributions. Furthermore
everytime you start a new project, you spend time on scaffolding and other setup
skills, which happen to be one of the rarest things you'll do at your job. Part
of my work deals with Java and I have no idea how the tens of configuration files
work together to build the project, but I also do not need to know how they work
(I could ask around or figure it out if I needed to though). On the other hand,
I have a ton of node projects and can create things from scratch but never needed
to do that ever.

In conclusion, a successful engineer can throw out features, but a high quality engineer
also pays attention to the design and structure of code of those features. Creating
a million pet projects to showcase your ability to code is good, but spending time
understanding other people's code is much better. But in the end, arguably, only
a small set of software engineers care much for maintainability and proper design,
and an even smaller set of non-software engineers care due to no immediate economic
benefits.

