# what is social media good for

Recently, someone asked if I had an Instagram for some unknown reason and, naturally,
I don't. This question made me think about what role social media plays in everyone's
lives and why it is so pervasive, and also how I seem to be one of the odd ones
out that does not participate in such things.

To start, I'll lift the definition for social media off of Wikipedia

> Social media are interactive technologies and digital channels that facilitate
> the creation and sharing of information, ideas, interests, and other forms of
> expression through virtual communities and networks

It seems the core idea behind a social network is the existence of online communities
and inter/intra-communication. If we look at the most popular social media examples;
Facebook, Twitter, and TikTok, we can see this to be somewhat true - although I'm
not very familiar with the exact details of what goes on in thse platforms.

For Facebook, you have a profile and I guess chat with other people and (maybe)
join communities that you're interested in. Twitter... well Twitter seems to be
more focused on communication, and I don't know how communities are exactly formed
on Twitter... either communities are centered around one person via followers or
topics via hashtags, I think. I believe TikTok also works in a similar vein.

Based on this definition, I think I could lump forums/message boards under the social
media category. And those I have definitely participated in. However I don't think
most people would include those under social media. Would you file a forum about
programming under Social Media? Probably not. I believe the defining feature is
that a social media platform is one that allows a diverse set of user created communities
within in - so if we added a gardening community and maybe a rock music community
in addition to the programming forum's already existing community then it starts
to sound like an actual social media platform.

We can also look at a few other examples listed by Wikipedia "that are sometimes
referred to as social media services" like YouTube, Reddit, and Discord. These platforms
allow users to create their own communities and also help connect them.

So, to make a heavy generalization, people regularly participate in social media
to interact with a community they feel that they can belong in - is tribalism the
right word? Not sure - Which sounds about right for me because I, as a loner, don't
participate much. Admittedly, once I looked at the list of social media examples,
I do use a few but mainly as a means of communication with a few select people
(which I would just replace with email if email had a more instant messaging like
experience). I do prefer smaller groups anyways.

Also, as a random aside, I think the whole narcissist/influencer thing is caused
by this, as it is just people trying to form communities around themselves instead
of around a common idea.
