# crypto implosion brewing

Crypto has had a pretty large impact on the economy in the past few years, but I
have reason to believe that things might implode pretty soon... maybe even in the
next week or two. Maybe a perfect chance to risk it all or find some arbitrage opportunities.

Undoubtedly the technology behind it, distributed ledgers (basically blockchains)
is interesting, but its use behind crypto doesn't justify the currency's value.
I just don't understand how anyone buys into it. Especially engineers working on
it - they must know that it's inherently worthless - a zero-sum game where money
is transferred from late adopters to early ones. Furthermore, the fact that mining's
energy use scales with the number of transactions... Yeah we're kind of already
having issues around our energy supply and don't need to be increasing our consumption.

Well, there is a ton of money to be made in the space as long as you are "early".
But who knows when early ends and late begins? That's something that can only be
found in hindsight. Either way, it must take a lack of morals to be working on crypto.
Or very strong beliefs in it, like kool-aid-drinking-level beliefs.

There are other signs like NFT failing and general trends that I'm observing, but
who knows what the future holds. Perhaps I'll be wrong and, if so, will look back
at this post and laugh at how oblivious I used to be.

There is also a possible recession (an actual recession, not the "recession" we're
in right now) that is tied into this. Specifically around tech companies' impossible
valuations and other things. I expect tech to dip in the very near future alongside
cryptocurrency. A little bit of sadness and jealousy on my side for not taking advantage
of the crazy (and mostly undeserved) high compensation packages some software engineers
are receiving but I don't really think the high value tech companies do much "good"
and I don't want to sacrifice morals or play the career game.

Meant to talk about crypto but ended up kind of talking about the economy.
