# copy and paste interview questions

A few weeks ago, I was doing a bit of interviewing to get a sense of the general
landscape of the job market available to me and I had probably my poorest
technical assessment experience yet.

It started out normally, phone call, introductions, and we get on some shared
coding thing and a question gets pasted in. I don't remember the exact details
but the gist is:

> You are given an array that shows an NFT's price over the next few days. What
> is the maximum amount of money you can make from buying and selling the NFT?

So the first mistake I make is a somewhat unrelated question - once you buy the
NFT don't you set the price to sell it as? I honestly just wanted to poke fun at
the idea of NFTs but for some reason the guy goes on a 5 minute tirade defending
NFTs. Uh ok I guess not all engineers laught at NFTs.

Carrying on, I note that this is a dynamic programming problem, and fortunately
I have a general understanding of how it works because I practiced it a while
back, I type the following into the editor:

```text
// let maxProfit(d, nft) be the maximum amount of profit you can make on day
// d and nft determines if you still own the nft
// maxProfit(0, false) = 0
// maxProfit(0, true) = -profit(day)
// maxProfit(day, true) = max(maxProfit(day - 1, true),
//                            maxProfit(day - 1, false) - profit(day))
// maxProfit(day, false) = max(maxProfit(day - 1, true) + profit(day),
//                             maxProfit(day - 1, false))
```

I also explain it; the maximum profit you can make on a day and own the nft is
the max of either you holding from the previous day or buying it today. The
maximum profit you can make on a day and not own the nft is the max of either
you not buying it and not owning it yesterday or having owned it yesterday but
selling it today. I ask if this sounds good and if there are any flaws with this
reasoning (because I'm not sure if there's some kind of edge case yet) and get
basically radio silence.

Ok... so I go on to write the solution, which I'll leave as an exercise to the
reader :). I run the test cases and they all succeed. At this point I say looks
like it all works and the engineer looks over my code. For some reason he
doesn't understand why I have two parameters to my function despite the fact
that I explained it - you need to know whether you own the NFT on the day to see
if you can sell or buy.

He then asks why didn't I write the recursive solution first, and I point out
that I have defined the problem recursively but already realized that there
would be a lot of duplicated recursive calls and solved it iteratively. He
mentions something about showing my process, but I didn't fully follow what he
was getting at.

After some back and forth, he ends up pasting some code which I assume is the
book solution for the question and I note that it does only have one parameters.
However inside the for loops there's an if statement which does more or less the
same thing as the second parameter So after a few moments of looking at his
solution I understand why I could drop the second parameter, but still argue
that I think it's not a big deal. Then he asks what if I change the question and
say you can buy `X` amount of NFTs.

And then I made my second mistake and joked that NFTs are unique so this
wouldn't be an issue, but pointed out instead of the second parameter being a
boolean we could make it an integer i.e. `numNFTs` and edit our
`maxProfit(day, numNFTs)` to consider `numNFTs - 1` and `numNFTs + 1`. He then
asks, would it be something like this, and pastes another block of code which I
assume is the other solution and I say yes.

Well, my 30 minutes are up due to all the discussion and we end the call. A few
days later hours later I get the message that I didn't pass that assessment
unfortunately (or fortunately?).

I did a bit of research later about some things and found out that there's
basically a "process" for solving dynamic programming problems in interviews
where you start out by coding the naive recursive solution and move on to
optimize it. So that's probably what the guy was talking about... Oh well.
