# a half baked replacement for angular js' $compile

Forewarning: I'm not checking any of the code I type below for 100% correctness.

I recently came across a bit of code that uses Angular JS' `$compile` to dynamically
generate content and I had to migrate it to a more modern Angular version. The only
issue is that there is no direct replacement.

To back up a bit, the reason `$compile` was originally used was because we were
allowing end users to submit markdown and have it display properly in html - but
in addition to basic markdown elements, we may also possible generate some components
based on what the text contains via some replace logic.

For example, we might do this kind of transformation:

```
| name | number |
| -- | -- |
| person_1_id | 123 |
| person_2_id | 456 |

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <td>name</td>
            <td>number</td>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td><UserInfo user-id="person_1_id"></UserInfo></td>
            <td>123</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><UserInfo user-id="person_2_id"></UserInfo></td>
            <td>456</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
```

And that second bit is passed to `$compile` to be inserted into the dom. Great.
Let's call the function that does this `generateTemplate` and its internal details
aren't very important; all you need to know is `generateTemplate(userProvidedText)`
gives back some valid html.

The first problem to tackle is how to get that html to render. If you've attempted
to do anything like this, then you should know the answer is the `[innerHTML]` prop
(are these called props or am I just leveraging React nomenclature?). Maybe something
like:

```js
<div [innerHTML]="html"><div>

// ...

ngOnChanges() {
    // i swear this is safe
    this.html = sanitizer.bypassSecurityTrustHtml(generateTemplate(this.userProvidedText));
}
```

The issue here is that the custom components, in this case `<UserInfo>` won't actually
generate. If you inspect the dom, then you would see `<UserInfo user-id="person_1_id"></UserInfo>`
with nothing inside it. Ok, that's a problem, so we need to somehow create the element;
fortunately we can do that with Angular. And depending on your version, there are
several ways to do so.

```js
const vcrCreated = this.viewContainerRef.createComponent(UserInfo);

const fac = this.componentFactoryResolver.resolveComponentFactory(UserInfo);
const facCreated = fac.create();
```

We'll worry about the other arguments later, as they are important. So this will
actually create the element and stick it somewhere in the dom, but we want it to
be in the correct tag. This is where how you create it kind of matters. For factories,
we can specify the `rootSelectorOrNode`

```js
fac.create(this.injector, [], somehowGetTheUserInfoElement);
```

But we're not so lucky with `viewContainerRef` and have to rely on native dom manipulation
to move the componet into it's correct spot (also you may have duplicated tags as
`createComponent` will generate the component's custom element in addition to anything
on the inside). You can also use Angular's `Renderer2#appendChild` instead of native
dom manipulation but, let's be honest, that's what it's doing under the hood basically.

So how do we get the UserInfo element? I've already hinted at relying on native
dom apis, and that's what we're going to use. Instead of using the `innerHTML` prop,
we will set it manually with `this.elementRef.nativeElement.innerHTML = html`.

Once we've done that, we can then rely on the native dom api to do most of the things
Angular doesn't let us.

```js
this.elementRef.nativeElement.innerHTML = generateTemplate(this.userProvidedText);
const baseElement = this.elementRef.nativeElement;

baseElement.querySelectorAll("UserInfo")
    .forEach(element => {
        // could be brought out but too lazy, also depending on number of elements
        // you may have an outer loop based on selector, component pairs
        const fac = this.componentFactoryResolve.resolveComponentFactory(UserInfo);
        const component = fac.create(this.injector, [], element);
    });
```

And you should see the component created and inserted. The last thing is to get
the props working, which we can do with `ComponentRef#setInput` or, if not up to
date `component.instance[input] = element.getAttribute(input)`. A small warning,
double check casing of the property as most browser automatically lowercase attribute
keys.

The final thing to talk about is to take advantage of `projectableNodes` if you
use `ng-content` anywhere. Simply pass `[Array.from(element.childNodes)]` as its
value. Overall, the solution should look like

```js
this.elementRef.nativeElement.innerHTML = generateTemplate(this.userProvidedText);
const baseElement = this.elementRef.nativeElement;

baseElement.querySelectorAll("UserInfo")
    .forEach(element => {
        const fac = this.componentFactoryResolve.resolveComponentFactory(UserInfo);
        const component = fac.create(this.injector,
            [Array.from(element.childNodes)],
            element);

        for (const attr of getAttributeNames()) {
            component.instance[attr] = element.getAttribute(attr);
        }
    });
```

Now, there are also some things you may want to do like keep track of generate component
references and `destroy`/`detectChanges` during the applicable lifecycle stages
but I'll leave that to you to figure out. Also you may be wondering about how `@Output`s
work or even directivesw. I haven't attempted to figure it out because it was unnecessary
for my use case. Overall, I think this kind of workaround sucks.

Well I guess this is what happens when components aren't treated as first class
citizens and you rely on a custom templating language.

