# a quick hobby project

A few days ago I finished working on a small hobby project which was to
implement the [paramedic](https://gta.fandom.com/wiki/Paramedic) side mission as
a kind of race mode for [Multi Theft Auto (MTA)](https://multitheftauto.com/).

It all started when a friend who plays MTA was asked for my help in regards to
an existing script. As a non-spoon-feeder, I tried to push him towards the
solution with a few hints but, as he is not a "coder", what should have taken 3
minutes ended up taking a little over 2 hours - which personally I didn't mind.
We then spent some time chatting about unique races and how everything is lost
to an old server.

> M: but that's a boring gimmic!!
>
> M: there are some REALLY script heavy maps...
>
> M: but they're gatekept on old server!!!
>
> M: this is a split-off...
>
> M: no active codemonkeys...

Anyways, the next day Paramedic is suggested so I start looking at the docs and
see what's possible. Keep in mind that I do not actually own the game at this
time. We end up spending 12 hours where I just come up with random code based on
documentation and send it over to him as a text file to try. Eventually I think
the progress is so slow (_cough_ no progress _cough_) I get the game and start
figuring out how to mod myself.

The main barrier for this game mode is that it relied on "randomized"
checkpoints while the base gamemode's checkpoints were static ones defined in
the map file. Furthermore, due to scoping, it was impossible to directly utilize
any of the code that existed in the base gamemode. However, after a bit of
sleuthing, I realized that the base gamemode came with the ability to trigger
arbitrary functions through events - send an event with name of a function as a
string and it might be called.

In my case, this was enough.

```lua
triggerEvent("onClientCall_race", root, "checkpointReached", element)
```

After that, everything is more or less smooth sailing. I kept track of all the
game state in my own code and I was able to get the main logic out over the next
few hours and got feedback from my friend 9 hours after getting the game.

We do a lot of single player testing and work out some bugs and exploits and
eventually get it onto a server with a few players for a multiplayer test. This
is when more issues were revealed:

1. turns out when your ambulance blows up, it blows up anyone around you.
2. relying on a server provided time and a client provided time to draw some
   things didn't work nicely when you're not hosting locally.
3. players could toggle spectate mode to teleport somewhere (last saved
   position?) without losing anyone you've picked up

1 was straightforward to fix after a little research, as you can just cancel the
event so the server never processes it.

For 2 I ended up doing an entire rewrite where I moved all the logic to client -
which I find is interesting as it's most likely much less secure. In fact, after
browsing through a lot of MTA code and reading how things work, I realized that
clients are actually the source of truth for a lot of things (client's can be
"syncers" which mean they control and report the state of certain elements to
the server).

3 was another dive into the base gamemode code. I eventually figured out that
triggering spectator mode fired off a server event, which I made fire off a
client event, which would reset your pickups as if you died.

The final thing I did was to split up the code in a way such that my friend was
able to make small changes. While he can't code, he is able to make small
adjustments to UI positioning that I don't care much for. The issue here is that
we would just send a single file back and forth - if I made a change before he
sent me his changes, I would just override his as I didn't want to bother doing
a fancy merge. What I ended up doing was creating events that would trigger
throughout the game and moved all the presentation logic into a separate file
that only relied on those events. e.g.

```lua
    triggerEvent(g_AMBULANCE_FULL_EVENT, localPlayer, true)

    -- other file

    addEvent(g_AMBULANCE_FULL_EVENT, true)
    addEventHandler(g_AMBULANCE_FULL_EVENT, localPlayer, function(alreadyFull)
        drawText(g_AMBULANCE_FULL_TEXT, 3500)
    end)

    -- rather than just drawText(g_AMBULANCE_FULL_TEXT, 3500) in the main file
```

I wanted to write about this as it really highlights what I enjoy about coding -
creating something that people enjoy and having basically full control over any
internal details. Meanwhile I think work is soul sucking because if something is
even remotely non-technical, I have to defer to someone else in the
organization's opinions. It's quite ironic that my friend calls me a codemonkey
when in reality I'm arguably more of a codemonkey at work.

Also, just to emphasize how much of a non-coder this friend is, we had this
little exchange to fix a bug:

> R: maybe off by 1 cuz i didnt want to make marker when checkpoint is at end
>
> R: idk!
>
> R: ok on line 114 u need to change < to <= !!
>
> M: ok...
>
> M: u sure it will work??????
>
> M: omg...
>
> _after testing on server and realizing something's wrong_
>
> M: ok broken for me too now
>
> R: ok dont send folder
>
> M: its ur <= !!
>
> M: i never tested that
>
> M: broke it!!!!!!!!!
>
> R: wtf
>
> M: not my fault....
>
> R: cant be...
>
> R: unless u changed it wrong
>
> M: i changed it to ==
>
> M: now it works again
>
> R: wtf
>
> R: what did u change...
>
> M: maybe because only 1 checkpoint?
>
> M: 1 level
>
> M: line 114
>
> R: no that only happens when u drop off
>
> R: show
>
> M: if level == g_NUM_LEVELS then
>
> M: now
>
> M: before
>
> M: if level <= !! g_NUM_LEVELS then
>
> R: why did u add !!
>
> R: wtf
>
> M: wtf???????
>
> M: u said !!
>
> M: i copy paste!!!!!
>
> R: LOL
>
> M: lmao
>
> M: i get it...
>
> R: actually hilarious
>
> M: agreed

How did you read it!!
