# writing a browser extension

So one of the initiatives I've recently taken was to switch the language of
things I use to Spanish in an attempt to passively pick up some vocabulary. This
included my browser which makes some websites also display in Spanish. Long
story short, I needed a browser extension to perform translations. I read about
Mozilla developing some ML models to perform client side translations a while
back and was able to find [the project](https://browser.mt/) and
[the extension](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/firefox-translations/).

After a short trial period of using the extension, I realized it didn't fit my
use case. Specifically:

- It translated the entire page and couldn't show the original text without
    refreshing
- It did not let me choose the languages to translate from but instead tried
    to detect it automatically

Also, when I looked closely, it ended up downloading models off of a cloud
bucket when needed. This happened to be a Google Cloud bucket; possibly not
ideal from a privacy or even availability standpoint.

So I thought I could contribute a few features and headed over to
[the repo](https://github.com/mozilla-extensions/firefox-translations/tree/1.1.4-build2)
(this isn't the actual repo but this contains the code I was looking at). A few
minutes of browsing later, I decided this code was overly complex and kind of
messy by my own standards (so many abstractions were forcing me to jump between
various parts of the repository, compounded by the fact that I haven't even
developed a browser extension before) for what the extension did and decided to
write my own extension leveraging Bergamot from scratch.

I'll skip over the details, as this isn't a browser extension developer tutorial
(spoiler alert, it's basically web development with some unique apis),
interfacing with bergamot and some other wasm modules, and just talk about a few
specific problems I ran into.

The first one was logging - I use print statements a lot to just check that a
certain branch of code is running and it just so happens that there are at least
2 output streams (consoles) to look at; the one for your current page and also a
debug one for the extension. I say at least 2 because I couldn't figure out
where logs were printing for the settings page, browser action popup, and other
things. I ended up implementing the user facing error display and using that as
the print statement for execution feedback.

The second issue was figuring out how I could let the user manage the language
models themselves; this implied that my extension needed the ability to read
files on the local computer somehow, which has been a big no-no in web
development for quite some time due to security concerns. Knowing this, I looked
for a way to store the file in the extension itself bu looking at the
[storage api](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/storage).
I reasoned that I would be able to store the file contents in storage keyed by
whatever. It seemed non-hacky until I read the following:

> The values stored can be any JSON-ifiable value

My code leveraged array buffers which aren't exactly "JSON-ifiable" without a
few transformations, but it turned out storage has no problem saving array
buffers without needing any intermediate operations. Also, I ended up storing
them as top level objects instead of nesting them under a key like models as the
way the storage api was designed suggested that replacing a key would add/delete
everything within it, and I didn't want to make some kind of unnecessary copy
operation for every model when only modifying one, but the quote from the docs

> You don't need to convert your values to JSON Strings prior to storing them,
> but they are represented as JSON internally, thus the requirement that they be
> JSON-ifiable

may suggest that it happens either way. Overall, I was able to write the core
logic of the extension in a couple of days, and then spent a bit more time
polishing the UI.

In my totally unbiased opinion, my extension is better (from a UX, code, and
privacy perspective; if you think having users manually upload models is better
than downloading from Google Cloud) than the official one at the moment, and
suits my needs perfectly.

All I need to do to use it aside from the model configuration is select some
text, right click, then translate; a pop-up with the translation will show up,
and if anything is wrong with the languages, I can modify them in the popup.
Interestingly enough, I ended up taking a look at some translation extensions
after the fact and noticed that the translation in a popup idea is pretty
common.

I do hope that others will find this extension useful, but, probably, in the end
I'll be the only one using it as I don't market much. In fact, I'm strictly
against doing so because I believe in things like a meritocracy or if the
extension is good, people will find and use it without me having to shove it in
their faces. Well, I know this is in general untrue but it's one of those hills
I'll die on. That was a random turn in topics.

Extension source can be found
[here](https://github.com/rei2hu/berga-translator). Extension download can be
found [here](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/berga-translator/).
