# personal yearly reflection 3

Well, there's a chance I won't be able to post this exactly on Decemeber first
because I don't feel the normal drive to write it but we'll see. I'll also have
to look at how I structured last year's content because I'd like to keep things
consistent - well, I believe I always start off with responding to last year's
topics anyways.

## recap

### remote work

Yep, still remote working. I am kind of a bit lax with start and end times but
otherwise I will always work when there is work... which actually isn't too
often - work comes in bursts but there are some periods of weird downtime due to
not having *enough* work prepared to be picked up because it needs PM input or
UX designs (trust me, these are probably not important). This was actually a
reason that I left my previous job...

Although I'd say with my current living situation I'm not the biggest fan of my
working space due to some personal reasons.

### seniority

Well, I'm constantly told the code I write is at a senior level, and I'm pretty
experienced and sometimes the go to person with some of the systems at the current
job so from a technical perspective I guess I'm getting pretty senior.

Communication-wise I'd say I'm also getting up there.

Maybe I'll get the senior title soon(tm) but hopefully that's not just title
inflation or something of the sort.

### free time

I have free time. I just don't have motiviation to really leverage for anything
productive for some reason. I stopped practicing languages because Duolingo
turned into a chore unfortunately, and I also stopped listening to the SE
podcast because at the end it was just noise (I'm not diving into any of those
topics after all).

What I do after work hours is basically just pick a tv show or movie to binge;
basically I watch all the aired episodes over the course of a week and rinse and
repeat.

### blog stats

I guess I've written less this year, based on the number of posts between this
reflection and the previous versus that one and that one's previous. I also know
for a fact that I've written some very very short posts that, let's be honest,
shouldn't even be posts. I feel like I don't necessarily have the drive or even
content to write as often as I'd like, although I do happen to be sitting on a
very nice topic at the moment.

I had also tried to improve the quality of writing by writing things but not
committing them until at least a day after and only after re-reading and had
also tried to fix spelling issues by running aspell now and then, but realized
I actually *don't* care as I prefer the stream of thought style writing with
all it's imperfections. I have made some improvements to tooling around linting
markdown though, so that satisfies some ocd for me.

### pandemic

Yep getting those super lonely vibes. But I did start hanging out with some old
friends in addition to finding some new ones that played games on the regular so
that's been quite good for my mental health.

I'm honestly not sure if we're still in a "pandemic" because my life hasn't
really changed, but I guess it's safe to say that we're at least not on lockdown
anymore. Perhaps covid is just a fact of life nowadays.

### new professional project

I have considered looking... mainly because there is just too much downtime at
my current job as I mentioned before. I'm not a big fan of being idle... but I'd
also hate to potentially cripple a company or be labeled a job hopper. It's not
a money thing I swear!

There is also the fact that I've kind of settled into more product focused
tasks, which I find fine although I used to, and still, want to be more of a
technical type. Being a product focused engineer is fine because I am kind of
exposed to user needs which is one of the reasons I originally wrote software -
making somthing people enjoy - but there's always the barrier known as the
product manager that keeps users away from engineers.

Maybe I can take a small downlevel to work on something more technical and interesting.

### last year's goal summary

1. Fix acne - yep, discussion topic
2. Solo trip somewhere - yep
3. Working on social issues/volunteering - no
4. Set up some solid relationships - maybe, discussion topic
5. Drink water - yep
6. Improve networking - no
7. Improve verbal communication - yep
8. Exercise - no
9. Sleep on time - maybe

### acne and appearance

The funny thing about my current situation is no one really sees me on a regular
basis, so I guess I let my appearance go a bit. I'm not going to give too many
details about my physical traits because muh privacay and whatnot, but I've
always had a normal BMI, almost smack dab in the middle of what the NIH
considers normal and I'm of average height. What did go is mainly my facial hair
which I only deal with once it gets annoying - I happen to be of a race that
doesn't have to deal with it too often so go figure.

Of course, when it comes to acne, I had a weird case but got it fully taken care
of mainly halfway through the year, had it come back a few months later, then
took care of it again. I literally considered writing a skin care post about
this but thought otherwise and decided to just dump some thoughts here once the
time comes. For me what worked was benzoyl peroxide, adapalene, and sleeping
early. The important part is to do this stuff consistently, as I have reason to
believe the relapse was due to me staying up late night to play a new game.

### moving

It's on my mind, my current living situation is pretty terrible (but I have
virtually no COL) and I want out. Part of the issue is no privacy, and another
issue is that as an extremely light sleeper it is virtually impossible for me to
sleep until like 2AM unless the stars align.

I have been looking at various areas to move to, but I want to be careful as if
I move, I will buy a house rather than rent, and if I buy a house, I will pay
for it in full rather than via mortgage since I have the savings and can afford
to do so.

### relationships and activities

So I joined a small group of people who play a player versus player game mode of
a game casually and for fun on a regular basis. I hadn't played it before but I
think I got pretty good over the months we've been playing together - in
fact I may be one of our best players now but I digress. Small scale player
versus player is arguably one of those most interesting aspects of gaming
because it has the most potential of providing new experiences - any player
versus environment content ends up being quickly repetitive and ends up being
mainly a grindfest. In this case, for me, it's typically going around a
battlefield as a group of 15-20 (organized in subgroups of 5) and brawling other
groups of the same size or larger.

However, around three quarters into the year, some guy who disappeared long ago
from the group reappeared and tried whipping us into tryhard competitive mode.
I wasn't too exceited about this because, while I don't mind going competetive,
I realized this guy had the kind of personality I did not like to play with -
extremely demeaning, blame shifting, and heavily unconstructive criticism.
Admittedely, it was quite fun as we ended up recruiting some
previously-competetive-but-now-casual-competetive players who gave some good
insight into gameplay; we often record our own point of views in fights and go
over them to review fights and look for improvements. That was good fun seeing
everyone improving and learning a lot myself.

We ended up trying out for a tournament but got shafted by the brackets; there
was a professional-competetive bracket and a casual-competetive bracket and we
ended up having to face a couple of professional-competetive teams because there
was no space for them in their own bracket. We place towards the bottom of the
rankings and it seemed like some people took it very hard and blamed it on a bad
day rather than just not being at a high enough level. Who knows? Oh yeah, did I
mention I didn't play because this was for EU regions so I was busy at the time
the tournament took place. I think we lost a couple of chill people because of
this and now we're on a break for the rest of the year. Unfortunate!

### new goals

1. Look into places to move to
    - Yeah my current living situation is retarded but I do save mad amounts of
      money. Six figure savings per year. Is moving somewhere better worth that
      much to me? It's possible!
2. Look for a more fulfilling job
    - I need consistent work. I could contract or something too.
3. Relationships
    - I'm not going to lie, romance is on my mind since it is free to wander so
      often. Since I plan to move and/or change jobs, perhaps then will be the
      time to pursue something? Dang I hope I don't sound super desperate.
4. Solo trip somewhere (2021)
5. Drink water (2020)
6. Sleep on time (habitual)

Honestly moving will probably trigger a lot of changes for me (for the better),
although it's possible I may just move go back to my old lazy self. We'll see
what happens when the economy is doing better.
