# on my laptop usage

So, I've recently picked up a new laptop after breaking my previous one. What
did I decide on? A Framework laptop! (wow very hip!)

## my first laptop

I'm too lazy to pull up the specs, but I bought my first laptop for highschool
and I think it was quite decent with 8GB ram, nvidia graphics card, and even a
touch screen! In fact, this laptop still works and I had to fall back to it when
setting up my Framework. The only reason I ended up retiring it was because one
day as I was crossing the street in University, a speeding truck clipped my
backpack which contained the laptop. It ended up messing with the screen hinge
somehow and I had trouble opening and closing the laptop. A few weeks in and
somehow the screen itself cracked due to pressure put on it by some component
when opening the laptop. It was quite annoying to disable the touchscreen when
the broken cracked screen simulated constant clicks towards the bottom left of
the screen - I was able to disable the driver for it eventually though. I ended
up using this laptop for a few more semesters at university until I bought a new
one. I'd say I used this for around 4 to 5 years.

## my second laptop

My next laptop was also good, specifically it was a gaming laptop with 16GB ram
this time and a more recent nvidia graphics card but no touchscreen. This was
the laptop I used as my personal for daily for the next few years, up until a
few weeks ago. What happened to this one was I accidentally knocked it off and,
I assume, the hard disk got screwed - there were some not-so-good noises coming
from the area the hdd was located whenever I used it. The last thing I did on
that laptop was to export as much data as possible to a USB, but some files were
unable to make it off cleanly as I assume certain parts of the disk couldn't be
accessed. At least I got the important parts out I'd say. It does suck though
because I had recently solved a problem with the cooling and the laptop was
powerful to do all the work I needed it to do.

## framework laptop

So now I needed a new laptop, but fortunately my budget was relatively high
compared to the previous two times. I had of course heard of the Framework
startup for the longest time and thought the idea was cool, especially as an
anti big-tech person. I took a look at their offerings and their catalog was
nice and approachable.

The specs looked fine except for the lack of a dedicated gpu, which was
important to me as a gamer. Fortunately, I don't play often play the newest
games out there or even games at their highest settings - as long as the game
can be played and I don't have too many issues then that's fine with me. This
used to mean gaming at 20-30 fps but I guess it's now in the 30-60 fps range
now.

Looking online, you can find a few comments around the performance of the Iris
Xe graphics card which seem to be quite promising for my gaming needs despite
being an integrated graphics card. So I went for it - DIY mode.

The one thing that was interesting to me was that all the storage options were
SSDs; at university I was taught that SSDs had certain lifetimes due to how they
work so I was kind of adverse to using SSDs for main storage but some quick
research says they are equally or even more reliable than hdds and usually last
at least 5 years (of course that depends on the amount of writing done). Huh,
wow, I guess that goes to show you should always figure out the details behind
random blanket statements (or maybe just keep yourself updated on whatever).
Also the startup and other loading times feel waaaay better than I am used to.

When it came to add-ons I ended up buying a 250GB storage expansion card as one
of the modules - there's a blog post out there on Framework that claims the
speeds are basically like interal SSDs and purchasing one was also suggested,
but at this point I feel like it's been a waste of money so far. I also got a
couple of USB-A and USB-C modules which seem to cover my use cases as of yet.

All in all, consideration, purchase, and delivery of the laptop took around 2
weeks, so I was pretty happy.

The actual DIY assembly part of the laptop was decent, but it wasn't really as
involved as I hoped it would be; mainly open the laptop, stick some bits in, and
close it; granted I would've realized this if I read the DIY guide ahead of
time. The nice thing is that I was able to cannibalize a stick of ram from one
of my old laptops to use in the framework so I now have 4GB more ram than I
would've had originally! I do like the construction of the case as it was simple
to open and utilized magnets in addition to screws that aren't fully removable
to keep the access panel on - my previous laptops are all held together by like
half the original screws because keeping track of what went where was tiring
since I opened them up a lot.

After assembly, I had to install an operating system so I went on laptop 1 to
set up a Windows 10 bootable drive. I hadn't used that laptop in a while so it
was still on Windows 8, and actually force upgraded to Windows 10 when I turned
it on and connected it to the internet. This would've been fine except it
re-enabled the touch screen functionality and I had to spend hours trying to
disable it again. Setting up the laptop with the bootable usb was quick and
easy, but I ended realized that some things were not working - turns out the
12th gen chip that the newest laptops have aren't exactly compatible with
Windows 10. That's reasonable because the drivers I downloaded were for the 11th
gen chips - I just really didn't want to set up a new bootable usb or use
Windows 11 because it just didn't seem like a mature enough version to use but
caved in the end. One set of updates later, everything does work fine.

I'm not a tech connoisseur so I don't have much criticism on the laptop; it does
its job; most qualms I have with it were readily apparent and could have been
discovered before purchase. Gaming-wise, it is definitely less performant than
my previous laptop, but good enough (or at least for moderately intense
scenarios for 10 year old games). I still have plans to set up another OS so
perhaps the 250GB module has yet to prove its worth. My conclusion on this
purchase is that it's mainly an expensive novelty at the moment, but may
demonstrate value later in its lifetime.

Written on a Framework laptop.
