# witnessed my first set of layoffs

This was the year I saw layoffs occur for the first time in my life. I'd say
there was about a 10% reduction in the total employee count. I say witnessed
because I was not in that 10%.

I don't know where all of the cuts were, but there were some people on the
engineering/product side which I can somewhat comment about. I'd like to think
that this is just a set of general observations of who got cut and do not wish
to come across as harsh or uncaring.

The first thing is that several ML engineers were cut; in fact I would say our
ML team was gutted, leaving only a few. I'm not too familiar what their
responsibilities cover so I can't say much there, but this also triggered the
product owner of the ML team to get cut (leave amicably) because they had put a
lot of emphasis on rolling ML features on to our products, which would now be
much tougher. I'd say at a high level I know of only one feature they've put
out, which I worked with them on, and after that nothing concrete had made it
onto the platform; at the moment I know that their remaining attention has been
shifted towards some analytics related project which had just started recently
while other in-the-works projects seem to now be on hold. Our remaining ML
engineers are mainly more of the more recent hires, but we also still have our
long time data scientist that started at around the same time as me.

We also lost a recently turned product manager (who was a former engineer) that
had been at the company for several years although based on code they've written
in the past I don't think they were very good when it came to engineering. From
a product feature perspective I guess they did fine though but didn't seem to
handle too much. We also had another engineer turned product manager who was not
cut - I don't think I've come across their code much (at all) in the codebase
weirdly enough. This person seems to be in a much more authoritative position
that I'd call much more experienced. We also have other pure product managers
of which I believe none were cut.

There were some software engineers cut, too. One of them started at a similar time
as I did - we were in the same onboarding sessions but worked on a different
part of the product as I did. I don't think they were too productive based on
the amount of pull requests they were making (no, not in a LOC way but rather in
an impact way). The other was a senior software engineer who we had hired
halfway through the year who also had little impact - I actually forgot they
existed until I heard their name in the list of layoffs. I saw maybe 2 of
their pull requests early on; both very simple bug fixes that seemed to take
them forever to do, and in one of those when I suggested a change to leverage
existing functionality in a framework we used they kind of did not know how to
work around a null pointer issue... a null pointer issue that they worked around
in the equivalent non-framework leveraging version of the code (think if html
element exists then do something). The other change they introduced had some (in
my opinion) perplexing syntax use in javascript to avoid setting a property
to an object if a variable was truthy.

```js
{
    ...(field && { field }),
}
// felt like the weird part was { ...falsy value } which works because of some
// reasoning that can be found in the language spec; object transformation then
// key enumeration

// if (field) obj.field = field;
// if (field) obj = { ...obj, field };
```

It was cool to see and I gave them the benefit of the doubt because they have
the title so I assumed it was a common thing although left a comment on it
during review. Perhaps it's a thing that is commonly used with React props, but
as I haven't used React for a while I'm not sure. I'm also not sure what they
would be doing if they're not working on fixes/features or doing code reviews as
this is a company that has very very little meetings for software engineers; I
don't believe they were involved with any serious projects either. As a reference
point, we had hired some other senior software engineers who started both before
and after who have had much larger impacts and are still here. I'll also note
these two people did a very small small amount of code reviews, which seems to be
a common problem in every company I've worked for. It is possible that there just
weren't enough projects to go around and they were taskless for a while.

We also lost our technical writer, who seemed like a pretty chill person who was
always asking questions about the products to get a better sense of them - they
were actually in my periodic meetings for my first big project here. That was
kind of saddening. But I'm not familiar with their work, in fact I'm not sure
where I would go to read what they've written!

SRE people were also cut, one similar to the senior software engineer whom I
barely knew existed in the idea that I also barely knew this SRE person existed,
and another, who I definitely knew existed but was kind of opinionated and a
little abrasive; there was a scenario where they wrote a script in Go and someone
suggested that our scripts should be in Python - we already had tones of scripts
all written in Python - so we wouldn't have to cover so many languages and
sometime later they typed "dOnT uSe GoLaNg". That person also played pretty fast
and loose with our production environment; they performed an accidental partial
update of part of our production systems which made them not work well with the
unupdated part and caused a little outage, among other things. In a sense it was
a blessing because we were forced to upgrade the rest of the system which
somewhat smoothed things out but found another issue around our configuration of
the new machines that they also introduced.

Overall, in our smaller engineering/product department meeting that we had after
the everyone in the company meeting that announced the cuts, it was claimed that
the people who were cut were mainly less experienced folk, which seemed true for
only some of the cuts from departments I had visibilty into. I'd augment that
explanation to cutting folk who were not being utilized well either due to lack
of expertise or overhiring. Again, I hope these come across as unbiased
observations but my opinion probably snuck in here or there.
