# setting up an os on removable media

Specifically related to a 250GB Framework storage expansion card I was convinced
to purchase alongside the laptop. I assume it works similar to any other
removable media.

TLDR: Make sure the bootloader file is loaded in `/EFI/BOOT/bootx64.efi` (or
maybe a different file name depending on architecture). This can be accomplished
when installing GRUB by including the `--removable` flag.

This is the "fallback" boot loader which is intended for removable media, and
works great with the expansion card. I guess I could have achieved similar
outcomes with an external usb but the expansion card is integrated in the frame
of the laptop itself - there may be some BIOS settings around boot order that
you may need to mess with to get a nice startup but otherwise steps are
literally the same as setting up a normal Linux distribution.

Below is a rough outline of steps based on the Arch Linux installation guide (I
use arch btw):

1. Load installation media
2. Run `fdisk -l` to figure out which device is the storage card. For me it was
   `/dev/sda`
3. Partition the drive into EFI, swap, and Linux partitions

    1. I prefer `cfdisk` because I don't know the `fdisk` commands.
    2. You can follow the Arch Linux suggested partitions. The partition names
       will be used in the rest of the steps.
    3. Make sure to toggle bootable for the EFI System partition.

    | Partition | Partition Type | Suggested Size |
    | --------- | -------------- | -------------- |
    | /dev/sda1 | EFI System     | >= 300M        |
    | /dev/sda2 | Swap           | >= 512M        |
    | /dev/sda3 | Linux          | Rest of device |

4. Format the partitions
    1. Create a file system for the Linux partition via `mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda3`
    2. Set up swap via `mkswap /dev/sda2`
    3. Format the EFI System partition `mkfs.fat -F32 /dev/sda1`
5. Mount the file systems
    1. `mount /dev/sda3 /mnt`
    2. `mount /dev/sda1 /mnt/boot`
6. Change root into system with `arch-chroot /mnt`
7. Install GRUB via
   `grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --efi-directory=/boot --bootloader-id=GRUB --removable`.
   Don't forget `--removable`!

Make sure you do other steps like installing network related packages and
actually setting up Linux/GRUB. If everything is done correctly, you should be
able to boot without the installation media and get the GRUB bootloader to show
when starting up (see BIOS menus around boot order, or try the one time boot
override with F12 to see if there's an entry for it). You may also want to add
an entry for your original OS so you may boot it while the storage card is
attached.

This setup allows loading the bootloader on the expansion card when it is
attached but otherwise loads bootloaders found on the laptop's storage when it
is removed. Hmm, very much like a CD... Do those still exist? Would it be
possible to add a menu entry for the OS located on the expansion card to the
laptop's boot loader? Possibly, but this way is cooler because you won't have a
dead entry unless the card is attached I guess.
