# positioning and filters

<style>
    #_67_block {
        color: black;
        background-color: white;
        height: 100px;
        width: 100px;
        border: 1px solid black;
    }
    #_67_toggle_filter + #_67_block {
        filter: none;
    }
    #_67_toggle_filter:checked + #_67_block {
        filter: invert(.5);
    }
    #block_24 {
        position: fixed;
        top: 100px;
        left: 100px;
        background-color: red;
        height: 30px;
        width: 30px;
    }
</style>

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: center">
    <div>
        <input id="_67_toggle_filter" type="checkbox">Apply filter
        <div id="_67_block">
            <div id="block_24">
            </div>
        </div>
    </div>
</div>

An interesting behavior I came across recently was the interaction between
filters and positioning. On this page is a red square with `fixed` position in
the top left. When applying a filter to its parent element by toggling the
checkbox, the element is suddenly positioned relative to the block.

The reason for this is because the `filter` property (among others) will create
a new "containing block" that determines the position of `absolute` and `fixed`
elements. This behaviour is document in the specification so is not a bug. The
discussion where the idea originated is around
[here](https://www.w3.org/2015/02/10-fx-minutes.html#action02). Unfortunately
the jsfiddle in the recording does not exist anymore, but based on the
conversation, the idea is for solving another issue.

In my case, I was using a combination of a filter as highlighting and creating a
child element as a tooltip. The tooltip was position by the mouse coordinates
and when a filter was applied, it was no longer by the mouse. I was able to
append the tooltip element to the document body instead as a workaround.

Interestingly enough, this does not seem to be an issue on Safari. Or rather
Safari is not spec compliant because it does not exhibit this behavior; but
we've always known it wasn't, haven't we.
