# use (and abuse) of pseudo-classes

<style>
	.p68_demo-div::before {
		content: "Demo:";
	}
	.p68_demo-div {
		margin: 20px;
		padding: 20px;
	}
</style>

I'm a big fan of not using Javascript in situations where it usually isn't
necessary, and this leaves me in the scenario of trying to implement things with
css. A core feature that Javascript typically fills is the ability to retain and
modify state in response to user interaction, and to also update what gets
displayed depending on the state.

If you've read [this somewhat related post](/posts/45) where I try to "generate"
randomness through css, then you may be familiar with a few pseudo-classes like
`:hover` and `:focus`. If you've seen any codeblocks, then maybe you know they
rely on `:checked` to work (if you haven't, there should be a ton of codeblocks
as this post will have some examples).

All of these things fall under the category of
[pseudo-class](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Pseudo-classes)
and is typically the cornerstone of these types of applications/hacks. Let's
take a look at what we can do with them.

First things first, let's look at some css/html that I threw together for my
codeblocks as it covers what is probably the most common use case of this:

```css
/* toggle styling */
pre > input + label:after {
	cursor: pointer;
}

pre > input:checked + label:after {
	content: "[\25b2] Collapse"; /* up triangle */
}

pre > input:not(:checked) + label:after {
	content: "[\25bc] Expand"; /* down triangle */
}

/* code block styling */
pre > input + label + code {
	display: block;
}

pre > input:checked + label + code {
	max-height: auto;
	overflow-y: hidden;
}

pre > input:not(:checked) + label + code {
	max-height: 20vh;
	overflow-y: hidden;
}

pre > input:not(:checked) + label + code:after {
	content: "";
	position: absolute;
	bottom: 0px;
	left: 0px;
	height: 50%;
	max-height: 10vh;
	width: 100%;
	background: linear-gradient(
		rgba(var(--rgb-factor), var(--rgb-factor), var(--rgb-factor), 0),
		rgba(var(--rgb-factor), var(--rgb-factor), var(--rgb-factor), 1) 90%
	);
}
```

```html
<pre>
	<input id=code-block-146 type=checkbox>
	<label for=code-block-146></label>
	<code class="css language-css"><!-- code --></code>
</pre>
```

There are a couple moving parts here, but the important thing to note is that
there are two "versions" of each style, one which has `input:checked` and one
which has `input:not(:checked)` - this makes the styles be dependent on the
state of the checkbox, which is toggled by the user.

If it's `:not(:checked)` then the content of the label for that input is a down
triangle and we limit the height of the codeblock to `20vh` while adding a fancy
gradient to fadeout/blur the content. If it is `:checked` then the height is
basically unlocked and the gradient is removed. ~~Now that I'm looking at it,
the arrow is reversed, but it may be fixed by the time you're reading this.~~

Click it and try! Or I assume you already have to see the code - if you happen
to have a super long screen and there is no expand toggle, disable Javascript
because there is a script that hides that toggle if the codeblock is short
enough.

Now let's go through the list of pseudo-classes on mdn.

## Element display state pseudo-classes

- `:fullscreen`
- `:modal`
- `:picture-in-picture`

In general these aren't too nice to use. Setting these classes is a large
interaction on the user's part, and bringing up a modal typically requires using
the `showModal` api, implying Javascript works.

## Input pseudo-classes

- `:autofill`
- `:enabled`
- `:disabled`
- `:read-only`
- `:read-write`
- `:placeholder-shown`
- `:default`
- `:checked`
- `:indeterminate`
- `:blank`
- `:valid`
- `:invalid`
- `:in-range`
- `:out-of-range`
- `:required`
- `:optional`

As we've seen above, we can get some value out of classes that describe the
state of the input, although how useful it really is from a user experience
perspective varies wildly. In my opinion, only `:checked` is useful, but you may
get some mileage out of `:blank`, `:valid`, `:invalid`, `:in-range`,
`:out-of-range`, and `:user-invalid` for basic form styling when coupled with
`min`, `max`, `pattern` or other attributes.

## Linguistic pseudo-classes

- `:dir()`
- `:lang()`

`:lang()` is possibly useful for i18n, but is probably more work than it's
worth. `:dir()`... there is a css property called
[direction](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/direction) that
I've never had to use but I know exists, might be useful there?

## Location pseudo-classes

- `:any-link`
- `:link`
- `:visited`
- `:local-link`
- `:target`
- `:target-within`
- `:scope`

There used to be some interesting things to do around `:link`, `:visited`, and
`:any-link`, but that was shut down due to security concerns of how people could
extract your browser history (could be done simply through having `background`
make requests to certain webpages based on what style is picked).

The interesting parts here are going to be `:target` and the similar class,
`:target-within`. These let you match against the url, and the url can be used
to store arbitrary state in a sense - if you're writing enough selectors and
elements to match them.

```html
<style>
	p.p68_tab {
		display: none;
	}
	p.p68_tab:target {
		display: block;
	}
	.p68_fake-tabs {
		display: flex;
		width: 100%;
		justify-content: space-between;
	}
</style>
<div class="p68_fake-tabs">
	<a href="#tab1">Tab 1</a>
	<a href="#tab2">Tab 2</a>
	<a href="#tab3">Tab 3</a>
</div>
<div>
	<p id="tab1" class="p68_tab">Tab 1</p>
	<p id="tab2" class="p68_tab">Tab 2</p>
	<p id="tab3" class="p68_tab">Tab 3</p>
</div>
```

<div class="p68_demo-div">
	<style>
		p.p68_tab {
			display: none;
		}
		p.p68_tab:target {
			display: block;
		}
		.p68_fake-tabs {
			display: flex;
			width: 100%;
			justify-content: space-between;
		}
		.p68_fake-tabs > a,.p68_fake-tabs + div {
			text-align: center;
			width: 100%;
			border: 1px solid red;
		}
	</style>
	<div class="p68_fake-tabs">
		<a href="#tab1">Tab 1</a>
		<a href="#tab2">Tab 2</a>
		<a href="#tab3">Tab 3</a>
	</div>
	<div>
		<p id="tab1" class="p68_tab">Tab 1 Content</p>
		<p id="tab2" class="p68_tab">Tab 2 Content</p>
		<p id="tab3" class="p68_tab">Tab 3 Content</p>
	</div>
</div>

Unfortunately, this does end up pushing entries to history, well maybe it's not
unfortunate depending on your use case as it offers a somewhat functional undo
(any redux users?) And jumping around to the anchor _might_ be annoying, but
this is somewhat avoidable with a different layout.

Wow I just happened to be looking at some `:target` docs to double check some
things and realised a lot of them also go with the tab example - I swear I did
not use those for inspiration! The point is that you can store "state" in the
hash and react to it accordingly through a mix of html ids and css styles.

## Resource state pseudo-classes, Time-dimensional pseudo-classes

- `:playing`
- `:paused`

- `:current`
- `:past`
- `:future`

I haven't used these at all, but I guess they could be useful (highlight current
while you dim other things?)

## Tree-structural pseudo-classes

- `:root`
- `:empty`
- `:nth-child`
- `:nth-last-child`
- `:first-child`
- `:last-child`
- `:only-child`
- `:nth-of-type`
- `:nth-last-of-type`
- `:first-of-type`
- `:last-of-type`
- `:only-of-type`

For me, most of these are only for alternating styles between several elements,
but one thing I kind of like is `:empty` which I use to add cheap loading icons
to things.

```html
<style>
	.p68_loadable:empty {
		display: flex;
		justify-content: center;
	}
	.p68_loadable:empty::after {
		content: "O";
		display: block;
		width: 16px;
		height: 16px;
		border: solid red 1px;
		border-radius: 50%;
		animation: p68_rotate 1s linear infinite;
	}
	@keyframes p68_rotate {
		0% {
			transform: rotate(0deg);
		}
		100% {
			transform: rotate(360deg);
		}
	}
</style>
<div class="p68_loadable"></div>
```

<div class="p68_demo-div">
	<style>
		.p68_loadable:empty {
			display: flex;
			justify-content: center;
		}
		.p68_loadable:empty::after {
			content: "O";
			display: block;
			width: 16px;
			height: 16px;
			border: solid red 1px;
			border-radius: 50%;
			animation: p68_rotate 1s linear infinite;
		}
		@keyframes p68_rotate {
			0% {
				transform: rotate(0deg);
			}
			100% {
				transform: rotate(360deg);
			}
		}
	</style>
	<div class="p68_loadable"></div>
</div>

Quite the bootleg spinner. I'm sure we'd be able to do better if it was
important! Once content is loaded... by Javascript... then the element is no
longer `:empty` and the loading thing goes away.

## User action pseudo-classes

- `:hover`
- `:active`
- `:focus`
- `:focus-visible`
- `:focus-within`

These are also good classes to know of, `:hover` and `:focus` can be used for
tooltips or previews of the like, but overall I think their states change quite
quickly for anything persistent.

```html
<style>
	.p68_spooky {
		text-align: center;
	}
	.p68_spooky::after {
		content: "Hover for Surprise!";
	}
	.p68_spooky:hover {
		transform: scale(5);
	}
	.p68_spooky:hover::after {
		content: "...";
	}
</style>
<div class="p68_spooky"></div>
```

<div class="p68_demo-div">
	<style>
		.p68_spooky {
			text-align: center;
		}
		.p68_spooky::after {
			content: "Hover for Surprise!";
		}
		.p68_spooky:hover {
			transform: scale(5);
		}
		.p68_spooky:hover::after {
			content: "BOO!";
		}
	</style>
	<div class="p68_spooky"></div>
</div>

## Functional pseudo-classes

- `:is()`
- `:not()`
- `:where()`
- `:has()`

These are more like augmentations for selectors rather than their own thing. I'd
say the most interesting one in this group is `:has()` as it finally allows
targetting an element with relative selectors, rather than the element the
selector ends at. For example `label:has(input)` targets the label while
`label input` targets the input.

I use `:has()` in my knock off darkmode on this site, which you can only see if
your browser _has_ `:has()` support - at the moment it's available to all except
for Firefox, which has it locked behind a flag and whose implementation doesn't
work for my use case - so the demo will only work if that's satisfied.

```html
<style>
	:root:has(#p68_input:not(:checked)) {
		--p68_color: red;
	}
	:root:has(#p68_input:checked) {
		--p68_color: blue;
	}
	label:has(#p68_input) {
		color: var(--p68_color);
	}
</style>
<label>
	<input id="#p68_input" type="checkbox" />Click to change var value
</label>
```

<div class="p68_demo-div">
	<style>
		:root:has(#p68_input:not(:checked)) {
			--p68_color: red;
		}
		:root:has(#p68_input:checked) {
			--p68_color: blue;
		}
		label:has(> #p68_input) {
			color: var(--p68_color);
		}
	</style>
	<label>
		<input id="p68_input" type="checkbox" />Click to change var value
	</label>
</div>

We can set various css variables based on the state of the child checkbox, which
is a similar approach to what I do for my lightmode/darkmode toggle. We can also
check if `:has()` is broken and show/hide things that rely on it like this:

```css
#lights-label {
	display: none;
}
#lights-label:has(> #lights) {
	display: flex;
	user-select: none;
	cursor: pointer;
}
```

This is css straight from my stylesheet, and prevents a browser like Firefox
from displaying the lights toggle as it doesn't include `:has()` support (though
when you enable the (incomplete) `:has()` support, it will show but not work).

Unfortunately we cannot exactly maintain the state across page transitions, but
maybe with some clever butchering of `:target` and other pseudo-classes we may
be able to do so... if we're willing to generate the right html - maybe
something like 2 urls everytime with either the darkmode or lightmode hash, and
which url shows depends on the current hash... if anything before wasn't
considered a hack, this definitely should be.

You also may be wondering about the performance of these approaches in terms of
a "how long does it take my browser to recalculate styles?" The short answer is
I have no clue - figuring these things out is 90% done as a casual brain teaser
and 10% because of my dislike of Javascript on sites that don't need it.
Overall, I do not notice any significant performance impact on this website,
which means it is fine... for this website.

Cue story about senior frontend engineer talking about one of his old company's
websites being slow due to complex css rules.
