# i love cloudflare (not)

A little backstory about me; I like privacy and take decent measures to preserve
my own.

Cloudflare seems to have grown to a point where their "Performance & Security"
solutions are used in a lot of the sites I frequent. Unfortunately, their means
that I'm constantly locked out by their checks.

When initially visiting a site, I'm usually greeted with the prompt:

> Checking if the site is secure Enable JavaScript and cookies to continue
> _site_ needs to review the security of your connection before proceeding.

Then, after enabling javascript, I'm greeted by the same prompt; this time with
a spinner. Instead of letting me in or erroring out, the page just constantly
refreshes. If I'm lucky, after several refreshes, I'm presented with a verify
that you're human by clicking here and if I'm extra lucky, I get in after
filling it out. If not... then I determine if the site is worth visiting, and
play the dance of determining which privacy measure I need to sacrifice to
appease Cloudflare if so. If I try to wait the screen out, my computer's fans
turn on...

Another thing that happens is getting randomly banned from sites as I'm in the
middle of browsing around. In fact, I just hit an "Access Denied (Error code
1020)" which spurred me to write this. Searching for the meaning of the code
leads me to believe that my _residential_ ip is what triggered it... or
something about a firewall rule.

> 1020 Access Denied is an error that commonly appears when Cloudflare perceives
> a threat associated with your IP address or when a firewall rule has been
> violated.

or

> So basically when the end-user sees the 1020 error, it’s because the IP
> address was blocked due to security concerns detected by the Cloudflare CDN.

There is a
[link to the cloudflare community forums](https://community.cloudflare.com/t/community-tip-access-was-denied-error-code-1020/66439)
that I assume would be a better resource, but guess what? I can't access it
because it's behind the endlessly refreshing screen I described above! I also
can't access
[this official(?) support link](https://support.cloudflare.com/hc/en-us/articles/360029779472-Troubleshooting-Cloudflare-1XXX-errors)
for the same reason!

Another issue I've run into is a sudden screen with the following text:

> Sorry, you have been blocked You are unable to access _site_ Why have I been
> blocked?
>
> This website is using a security service to protect itself from online
> attacks. The action you just performed triggered the security solution. There
> are several actions that could trigger this block including submitting a
> certain word or phrase, a SQL command or malformed data.
>
> What can I do to resolve this?
>
> You can email the site owner to let them know you were blocked. Please include
> what you were doing when this page came up and the Cloudflare Ray ID found at
> the bottom of this page.

So I'm just banned off a random website for some unknown reason. Fortunately it
seems to get lifted after a day or so; whether that is because the owner removed
my ban or if it only lasts that long, I have no idea.

On one hand, I understand that getting DDoS'd is terrible and providing security
against it is good, but as the person being falsely flagged it's extremely
annoying. I doubt Cloudflare cares much for me as a single data point, as their
false positive rate is probably quite low and therefore good enough from a
metrics standpoint, but it sucks. At least I know my privacy measures seem to be
effective if they consider me one of millions of bots?

Come on, step it up...
