# my time on mmos

I've recently just stopped playing Guild Wars 2, which is the game I hinted at
in my [yearly reflection](/posts/62) and realized this is probably the first
couple of months where I haven't spent some time on massively multiplayer online
games (MMOs) - in fact, I'm not sure I will pick one up in the future now that
my [current laptop](/posts/63) has extremely low specs. Because of this, I've
decided to look back and review various aspects of MMOs that I regularly played,
including things like how I got into them (I believe there's a common threat),
how far into the endgame I was, my experiences and opinions, and other things I
consider fun or interesting to know. We'll start with Guild Wars 2, as it was
last, then go in an order that lets me distribute graphics evenly :).

## guild wars 2

The interesting thing here is that I typically do not pay money for games. I got
into Guild Wars 2 because I sent a friend a \$50 prepaid card for his birthday.
He ended up spending around half of it on Guild Wars 2, and wanted me to also
play it so I, like the cheap person I am, used the other half of the money on
the card to purchase my own copy with his blessing.

For the next two or so months, we hit max level (not really an achievement in
this game) and played through both the Heart of Thorns and Path of Fire
expansions. After this, he kind of dropped off and I was left to play by myself.

Over the next two years, I would end up getting full legendary equipment for
medium armor classes, obtain basically maxed out characters for each profession
(professions are classes like thief warrior etc), have around 16000 achievement
points, and play through most aspects of the game, including the newest
expansion... which I bought.

Like most MMOs, initial progression is kind of boring - many activities give
experience quickly get repetitive. When I quit, I understood that they were
testing out new experience curves to help with this. Once you hit max level,
there are suddenly many more things you can do - Guild Wars 2 touts horizontal
progression, and this is where it kind of comes in. It's typically
straightforward to get "good" gear (just ~5% worse than the best gear!), and
changing your characters' combat skills is free, which means not much time is
spent on prepping a max-level character. In fact, gearing is irrelevant if you
are a PvPer, as equipment there is standardized (there is another kind of PvP
game mode where gear does matter, though).

Gear is simple in the game; a few combinations of stats exist, and any piece of
gear can have that combination. The three (two) highest tiers of gear are
exotic, ascended, and legendary. Exotic gear with most stat combinations can be
acquired easily, ascended can be acquired somewhat easily and offers a minuscule
boost, and legendary takes forever to acquire and is only better than ascended
in quality of life features.

Once you've picked up a semi-meta build, you may continue to the main PvE
activities, which are going to be achievement hunting, doing events, or raiding.

Achievement hunting is diverse and includes things like collecting items,
completing jumping puzzles, or satisfying other criteria. Achievements can lead
to better gear and other unique rewards and are usually straightforward, but
perhaps tasking, to perform. I only had around 16k achievement points, where a
maximum of 50k - 60k exist, but 16k is arguably quite respectable, and I would
say 30k is like a longtime consistent player.

Doing events is probably an interesting one, as there are generic events that
occur on timers around the world that are open to anyone. Some of them require a
very tiny amount of teamwork and skill - in some cases, too much. Many of the
existing large events are set at an elementary level where minimum effort is
required to receive rewards, which seems to have had a certain effect on the
general player base. Other events, like the Dragon's End meta, that initially
had a high failure rate, were slowly nerfed to fit the average player. The
events are fun at first, but the more difficult ones become annoying once you
realize you cannot really control much in a group of 50 random players.

Raiding is the typical MMO type of raid. It uses the standard group composition
of support/tank/damage dealers and has some unique mechanics to work around.
There are also strikes, which are a kind of compressed raid with only one boss.
There are also fractals, which some people would disagree as categorizing as
raids, where party composition is free-er (typically all damage) and consists of
several types of dungeons. All of these fights include challenge motes, which
can make them more difficult for more rewards or achievements. Like all
activities, these were interesting at first, but quickly grew boring and
repetitive. The main issue around this is running with less experienced/more
casual players who don't quantify the impact or learn mechanics that drag the
group down. Guild Wars 2 allows addons and mods, like ArcDPS, which can be used
to track damage among other stats. I also know they introduced a kind of
beginner mode for raids to help things along.

As for PvP, there is structured Player versus Player (sPvP) and World Versus
World (WvW). I will skip over sPvP.

WvW is where I spent the entire second half of my time. This is a server versus
server game mode, hence world. The idea behind this game mode is to capture and
hold various structures in maps, but not many care about that. The things people
cared about were matchups, experience, and fights.

The matchup is slightly related to capturing and holding as that activity
determines the score and, therefore, which servers will be fought in the next
match - specific servers have specific types of players which may or may not be
fun to play against. Experience is strictly to get rewards, and
capturing/fighting is what nets experience. Holding kind of does; it is only
relevant if there are enemies to defend against. Fights are probably the thing
that most WvW players enjoy, as it consists of groups of 20-50+ players running
at each other in a somewhat coordinated fashion - nothing beats smashing a group
twice your size as usually numbers matter, but sometimes they don't - public
groups have more people but a wider distribution of skill, private groups
typically have higher quality players but fewer of them. Eventually, I got tired
of this, though, and went on to do guild versus guild (GvG) which is the same
thing, but where the sides consist of try-hard players who focus on fighting
other try-hard players exclusively. It's probably the funnest game mode, as
fights do have a few consistent themes but are more random and require a lot
more coordination to do well in.

Here's a clip of casual GvG where I pull, then knock around a guildmate so he
dies.

<video controls src="/blobs/71/arcane.mp4" />

I'm not really listening to the commander, but getting a pick is sometimes
actually better. This kind of single target gameplay is table stakes for GvG as
it's extremely efficient... except it was a casual one and my troll gameplay
caused a bit of drama as it turns out I was knocking around a server admin in
other rounds (certain professions are better for targeting as they have less
survivability). I have a full recording and more in the following youtube
playlist: PLFcNSaFKsff(sx)dzOzjZbzVNa-Nj-uw(uno)ox(nein); replace the
parenthesized text with the single digit number.

I did end up quitting because WvW was the only thing keeping me in, and I
couldn't find a high skilled but casual guild that matched my taste. And my
current guild did disband - though I'll partly attribute it to the toxic
try-hard mentality that was introduced over the past few months.

If I had to summarize Guild Wars 2, I'd say that it's a good game with diverse
content, the only grind is the one you set for yourself, and if you're looking
to enjoy the entire game, find some proper people to play with; well, that's
true for all MMOs, isn't it?

## gunbound

Casual cartoony game time!

I don't think I really played this game that much, but it did leave an
impression on me - perhaps it had to do with math brain. The core gameplay
involved firing projectiles at other players based on a picked angle/power and
taking wind into account. Depending on what you picked, projectiles would also
have interesting effects such as attracting nearby players to the impact area,
or tunneling underground. It was an extremely fun game and I'm not sure why it
shut down; maybe because the skill ceiling was kind of low - once you know how
to aim then it's basically game over. Aimbots were kind of easy to implement,
it's one of those scenarios where the hacks could be external to the game
itself. Imagine inputting wind speed, distance, and height difference into a
calculator and getting angle and power out; although this way doesn't exactly
factor special mechanics in.

## adventure quest

## adventure quest worlds

## dragon fable

Like most of my early games, I think I was drawn to these 3 because of their
graphics and simplicity. Top that off with a ton of content, it was quite good.
The only downside would be that all of these had very little player interaction.
Well, also I'll mention that after a certain point of playing these games, I
just used trainers to bypass various barriers and explore more easily - it's
interesting how simple making trainers for these games were. I feel like I was
able to cover a solid amount of the content in these games, but there always
seemed to be more.

## maplestory

Well, of course I had to write something about this game, didn't I? I honestly
consider going back to it quite often, but I know it's changed a lot so this
review will be extremely out of date.

I figure I played since 2005 because that's when PICs were introduced, and
played up until... 2011? Based on what I remember of the game and what I'm
reading of the patch notes, sometime between the MapleStory Legends and
MapleStory Alliance Rising patches is when my first main account was banned.
There's probably a year or two in there that I didn't play the game, then picked
it up a bit after as I'm familiar with some things mentioned in the later patch
notes. Looking at an [older post](/posts/18) about the game, I claim 2014, so
let's go with that.

Of course, as explained in the post mentioned above, my early time consisted of
just walking around and exploring the world after luckily coming across a
relatively large amount of mesos (money) to fund the exploration. Now that I'm
looking closer at what I said in that post, I assume that the period of quitting
was sometime between 2007 and 2008, as the trashmail year suggests my main
account was created then - I do remember they offered new domains depending on
the year so it may be after. I also remember the existence of Demethos. Either
way, when I got back into the game, I started grinding.

I will use the following [timeline](http://www.southperry.net/timeline.php) to
mention anything I remember about these releases or events, and then comment on
anything I think of in between.

### 2005 - Cash Shop Opens

I remember I used to sit in the Cash Shop for a long time just trying things
out. And the music is fantastic and chill. I guess I was like a window shopper
in that sense.

### 2006 - Omega Sector

### 2006 - Aqua Road

### 2006 - Amoria

I remember the release of these areas as I immediately traveled to check them
out. I'm not exactly sure how I got through Omega Sector and Aqua Road as a
level 19 player, but perhaps it used to be scaled down. Also, the release of
Amoria was amazing as it was probably one of the largest maps to date and very
romantic to boot!

### 2007 - Henesys PQ/Ludi Maze PQ

### 2007 - Prendergast Mansion (Haunted House)

Henesys party quest (HPQ) was an interesting one, not because of the actual
gameplay, but because it led to specialized roles to cheese the PQ. The PQ was
completed after obtaining 10(?) rice cakes and any extras should be removed from
your inventory after leaving the area, but this could be bypassed. This led to
the creation of smugglers, who were able to "smuggle" rice cakes out of the
area - leading to the ability to finish the PQ quickly. Another role was someone
that could lure - The main task, depending a bunny that created rice cakes, and
"lurers" would use Pico-Pico Hammers (weapons with minimum attack stats) to
attack and lure enemies into a corner of the map. More wouldn't spawn until the
current enemies were killed.

PQs overall were a fun activity, although a lot of them involved brute-forcing a
code in their stages e.g.

- Kerning PQ - Have 3 people hang on 3 of the correct ropes out of 4.
- KPQ - have 3 people stand on the correct 3 platforms out of 5.
- Ludibrium PQ - guess the right box out of 3 15 times in a row. (fixed answer
    though)
- LPQ - stand on the correct 5 boxes out of 9.

And probably more that I'm forgetting. I do know PQs were later greatly
simplified. Talking about LPQ also reminds me of one of my favorite skills;
Power Guard. It damages enemies when you get damaged and could be used to kill
"unkillable" enemies or enemies of much higher levels, as long as you had the
health to withstand their attacks. This led to many other things, too, like my
favorite hack, which utilized PG mechanics for damage and teleported me to mobs
or mobs to me to kill - probably one of the more unique hacks out there.

### 2008 - Jump Down

Wow, can you imagine there wasn't a way to jump off a platform to the one below
before this? This was a fun and convenient little action that helped getting
around. It also introduced the ability to clip through the floor if jumping down
onto a vertical barrier, sit on air by sitting on a bench above but jumping down
at the same time, resulting in sitting on the lower platform under the original
bench, and some more exploitable movements.

### 2008 - World: Demethos

This would end up being my main world. It's possible that I played a little
before this but I don't remember much of that time. The skull icon is sick!

### 2009 - Temple of Time

One of my favorite areas; the music is good, and the mobs were arguably the
coolest in the game at the time. This area features some of my favorite
soundtracks. Also, the Pink Bean is at the end.

### 2009 - Class: Cygnus Knights

An entirely new storyline, and another area of my favorite soundtracks. I
remember my first Cygnus Knight was a Thunderbreaker, which was their version of
pirate, as I didn't play one yet - also, they got a very cool super saiyan
transform skill. There were also nice bonuses for having a Cygnus Knight linked
with other characters, and they had extremely flashy skills overall.

Another thing each Cygnus Knight had was a tiny sprite that could be summoned
alongside and automatically attack enemies within range. With a little clever
editing of the game files, this sprite could do huge map-wide attacks.
Unfortunately, the damage was fixed, so it was only useful at lower levels, like
at HPQ. I remember using it there blatantly in front of people, and I don't
think they suspected it was a thing because I claimed it was a buffed version.

### 2009 - Class: Aran

Arans introduced yet another new class and storyline. It also introduced a
unique playstyle - auto attack until you hit enough things to build up a combo
and release a power move. The auto attack was the first one that could mob (hit
multiple mobs). There was also a funny exploit where the intro gameplay for an
Aran started you off at level 200, where you get knocked out and become a
weakling, but if you knew what to do, you could escape the intro and get a free
level 200 Aran.

But being a level 200 Aran only bypasses the grind, as both Arans and Cygnus
Knights were required to complete certain questlines to unlock skills and other
things - this is a theme that would appear for any non-explorer class (explorer
being the base thief/mage/bowman/warrior/pirate classes.)

### 2009 - New Tutorial for Explorers

I'm not sure if this is what I think it is, but it was a revamp of the tutorial.
You start in a factory of some sort, and there's a conveyer belt I think; I
don't remember much... But it also introduced a lot of new starting gear when
creating your character. They were just cosmetics with no stats, but when you're
like me (cheap), you take anything you can get!

### 2010 - Monster Survival PQ

Hehe, the true casual botting scene has arrived. Monster Survival PQ, which I
learned is another name for Nett's Pyramid, was probably the easiest and most
lucrative thing to ever exist for botters. It consisted of killing an endless
stream of undead monsters and giving rewards based on performance, up to a cap.
With all the new mobbing classes, it was extremely easy to bot. Certain client
file mods could do things like make mobs only walk in one direction that helped
to group them up in a relatively undetectable manner. Me? I played a cleric so I
could spam heal, which damaged undead monsters, all the way through. Combined
with MP Eater, I'd be permanently topped off, and there was no need for UA
(unlimited attacks) because I'm constantly being knocked around by mobs. The
rewards were massive, and I often had several characters botting it at the same
time 23/7.

### 2010 - Class: Evan

Yet another class released in Maplestory's attempt to drive its story. It was a
unique class featuring a permanent dragon partner, but I never really invested
in one. On the other hand, one of my friends that I provided Holy Symbol, a buff
that gives bonus experience, to was one of the first level 200 Evans on the
server, if I remember correctly.

### 2010 - Boss: Chaos Zakum and Chaos Horntail

Nothing much to say except I was in one of the first few raids to beat this on
my server.

### 2010 - Follow System

This probably wasn't much overall, but still allowed various small but
interesting exploits. There was a small guard against following someone with
movement skills e.g. Flash Jump or Teleport, but toggling follow at the correct
time could bypass it for one "movement." Best used with a gunslinger's Wings
skill which allowed slower descent for you and, therefore, your follower. I used
to fly people to places typically unreachable to their class for fun.

### 2010 - Potential Item System

Aka the system that broke the balance of Maplestory. Imagine picking up an item
that suddenly increases your main stat by 20%. Or one that gives a slightly
weakened version of a class's signature move e.g. Holy Symbol or Hyper Body
(increased health). It's actually crazy that they added it, although I assume it
was a p2w move as it came with Cash Shop items for re-rolling potentials and
whatnot.

### 2010 - BIG BANG

Huge change. I don't know where to start. It's an entirely new game at this
point. At least it did better than Maplestory 2!

### 2011 - Lion King's Castle/Castle of Von Leon

This was _the_ place to train when it was released. Mobs here were extremely
tough, required a few damage players to take down, and gave a ton of experience.
Couple that with experience bonuses for hunting in parties, and a 2x experience
event, people would be queuing up for these maps for hours. Fortunately, as a
Bishop, I could easily get into a party needing Holy Symbol and just needed to
press it every couple of minutes or so to keep the buff up. Which reminds me of
another client side mod that changed the range of HS to be map-wide rather than
a small area around the character.

### 2011 - Gate to the Future/Boss: Empress

Nothing much to say here, except brag again I was in one of the first successful
raids against this boss.

### 2011 - Player-vs-Player (PvP)

### 2011 - Capture the Flag

I don't remember which was which, but one funny thing was how unbalanced Bishops
were in PvP. Their main attack skill, Shining Ray, was aoe damage and stun. They
also had a skill called Doom which turned people into snails. I often got the
hacker comment for using Doom, and, at this point, I wasn't actually hacking as
this account was "important" and I didn't want to risk it.

### 2011 - Silent Crusade/Crusader Codex

This is the last thing I remember doing on my main account, hunting down various
mobs and mini-bosses to collect their cards, as I was fully geared at this point
and just hung around in towns or did basic things. I must have been locked out
sometime recently after this. I won't really go into my return to the game as
it's quite casual and uneventful.

One memory that I'd like to bring up is how I attended my first (virtual)
wedding in Maplestory. It was for my guild leader, who said he was a veteran,
and he bought a wedding ticket from the Cash Shop. I'm not sure who the virtual
girlfriend/wife was, or if they knew each other in real life. I do remember the
guild leader spending a lot of in-game money for her, though. The wedding was
fun, and there were random after-wedding events and rewards. I even gave them
some kind of wedding gift, but I've forgotten what it was.

Another memory would be the first time I killed the balrogs that sometimes
attack on the ship to Orbis, then inviting everyone outside because it was safe
to come out.

And one where I finally hit max mesos on a character (it's the 2^31 -1 number!)

Also one where I was able to reconnect with a friend months after not seeing
them - he used to be a trusty damage dealer while I was a trusty support. He
disappeared for a bit, but then I ran into him in an area we first met at, and
we played together until I was banned. Hi, Boredsback if you're reading this...
or was it Boredisback? I don't remember.

A classic one is me spending my Christmas decorating the in-game tree by
dropping items in front of it with some friends. My most coveted item may be a
star that glows when dropped.

Dang, I wish I had _any_ record of my time back then. I would rate the game as
used to be good but, now, based on what I hear, it's kind of whatever.

## dungeon fighter online

## dungeon n fighter (KR)

I'd say DFO wasn't a game I try-harded much at, but instead one where I may have
contributed to the botting scheme that eventually crashed the game's economy and
killed the initial release. Yes, I played legitimately and had full sets of
gears with special bonuses for Crusaders, but I mainly spent my time helping a
few people mess with the game - it wasn't too difficult as it was centered
around packet capture and editing.

There were some unique hacks, like using various consumables without actually
needing them, but the important hacks centered around three things: hitting
things on screen for a maximum amount of damage, god-mode, and automatic
movement/looting; it was very straightforward, and bots could easily run through
dungeons and collect rewards. At the height (or lowest point) of the game, I
could watch tens or hundreds of bots with gibberish names entering and exiting
dungeons every few seconds. There used to be a fatigue system that limited how
much one could play or get rewarded per day, but that was removed, and the game
slowly died after.

After it died, I was invited to play the Korean version, which required some
kind of Korean citizen identifier to register for. I was given an account to
play with though, so I didn't have to mess with that. I also remember having to
use IE and downloading some kind of extension... My main in-game memory of that
is not understanding any of the text, trying to speak to some random players in
English, asking my friend to translate what they're saying, and him telling me
that everyone was calling me a Yankee. Hilarious!

Of course, there was a re-release of the game for the global audience, and I was
pulled back into my old group. This time, I tried to play both sides; legitimate
icon and shady icon. I even hosted a legitimate PvP tournament early on... which
one? The one where a community manager accidentally left his "hit things on
screen automatically" hack on stream and was subsequently banned a bit later. If
I remember correctly, the fact that he was a community manager wasn't released
yet, but _another_ community manager leaked some Skype chats that showed proof.
Unfortunately it seems the drama has disappeared to the void because the website
didn't allow crawling and the domain has been bought out.

<video controls src="/blobs/71/hacker.mp4" />

Those are the hacks I worked on being demoed! Man, just seeing that UI I made
for the tournament on the right brings back memories. It is a beautiful
monster - now that I'm looking at it, I instantly have ideas on how to improve
it: center the names and mirror one of the portraits. I didn't have much design
sense back then, as I only had to design menus. I'm not going to lie, I did
quite a poor job hosting the tournament as I remember having trouble just
keeping the graphics and bracket updated.

Part of this tournament was an impromptu fight between two of the top(?)
American(?) players and a transfer student from Korea who happened to be a pro
player for the game because the caster disconnected. I found that funny because
I remember someone just spamming a huge aoe to zone the Korean player and the
other guy taking shots.

<video controls src="/blobs/71/teamwork.mp4" />

We quickly see how two people team up against one despite it being a free for
all fight - very interesting! Sorry for the audio cutting out, I assume I'm
switching windows to talk with the caster. Full recordings of that tournament
exist, but you'll have to find them yourself. They are from 2015, and, if you're
wondering, the professional player (JungJam) won overall.

But in the end, I didn't have much interest in playing the game again, and this
time it showed - I stopped having anything to do with it. Also, they kept the
fatigue system up this time, which comes with pros and cons. I guess I used to
spend an over-average amount of time on games, so I would need more fatigue
points than the average player.

I'd rate the game as very fun! But, like most games, devolves into an grueling
grind that is limited due to limited entries into endgame dungeons per day and
the fatigue system. PvP is also fun, but DFO PvP seems to be greatly impacted by
lag compared to PvP in other games.

## combat arms

And now a shooter. I seem to remember Combat Arms boasting a ton of weapons and
modifications, but at the end of the day, there are only a few meta picks, so
no, I did not care for that. I took a little interest in the normal PvP game
modes like Search and Destroy and Elimination Pro, but spent most of my time on
the game modes Quarantine and Fireteam, reaching a decent rank with a solid 2.0+
KD ratio. The rank was a vertical silver stripe.

Quarantine is the standard zombie mode, where a few players are infected and
need to infect other players. Non-infected players either try to eliminate the
infected or stay alive. There were several aspects to Quarantine that I really
enjoyed. First of all, some maps were huge and allowed hiding in very clever
spots, my favorites being either under the bridge on Kill Creek or on the
backside of a net that acts as a ladder in Two Towers. Hiding spots don't always
have to be in corners, though. A classic hiding spot I had in Overdose was to
just crouch against a wall by some props, and it had a quite high success rate.
There were more offensive strategies, and they typically involve explosives -
the most effective weapons against infected. Setting 3 mines on a choke point
could instantly kill infected, and bringing LAWs, RPGs, and HE grenades could
greatly help destroy them in other scenarios. In Overdose, there were a couple
of safe rooms that opened after a set amount of time which could allow for
amazing setups while infected try to break in. If there is no safe room and I
was discovered, I could typically try out-parkouring infected movement by
jumping around on obstacles.

Fireteam is a co-op game mode where players fight against NPCs. There were many,
but the one I remember best is Cabin Fever, which is basic zombie wave survival.
A few rounds in and there probably won't be enough firepower to keep infected
out of the cabin, and you end up having to run circles around the cabin while
they follow. I think I've only beaten it legitimately a few times, but
illegitimately... many times, which brings me to the more unique hacks for
Combat Arms. All FPS games and shooters have a typical array of hacks, which
include things that modify weapons like no recoil or no spread, and hacks that
give extra information like chams, esp, or wallhacks. Combat Arms had two unique
hacks which were dubbed OPK (one position kill) and telekill (teleport kill).
What they did is teleport you to an enemy, or an enemy to you, so you could
attack forward, typically with a melee weapon, and hit them. Naturally, this
kind of hack made Fireteam missions easy (and could make any PvP game mode easy,
but I didn't use them there... usually). These things could be combined with a
client side mod that changed the fire rate of weapons (including melee) for very
quick kills.

Another interesting thing is that the weapons could only be purchased for fixed
periods of time. Maybe I should say rented. I did end up spending some money on
a permanent K5SD though... not sure I leveraged it much. I enjoyed the game, but
I think the movement and gameplay was a little slow and clunky.

## crossfire

Another shooter? This one is unique in that it is the only MMO that I played
with a friend that I knew in real life. Like Combat Arms, I was mainly a fan of
its unique game modes like Mutation Mode and Ghost Mode.

Ghost Mode consists of semi-invisible melee only players attempting to plant a
bomb and normal players trying to prevent the bomb or defuse it after its
planted. Being a ghost was definitely a lot funner as it had some nice skill
caps around movement - moving is supposed to be revealing, but a combination of
jumping, crouching, and strafing, could allow one to move almost as efficiently
as running while remaining fully stealthed. It could only be done backwards, but
you could turn around mid jumps to see where you were going. The other counter
to ghosts was being heard breathing, but the technique to avoid this is to not
spend much time by normal players - just drive-by melee them. Arguably a good
ghost was very hard to defeat. I played it so much that I literally had numerous
specific techniques and tactics that I would use in most games. On the other
hand, as a normal player, you get ranged weaponry - camping in hard to reach
areas and spraying in the direction of breathing noises is about as good as it
got at high levels. Or maybe catch a glimpse of a ghost? Or just have hacks to
show where ghosts are... I may have made and used something like that a few
times.

Mutation Mode is the zombie mode. There are two approaches for this game's
version; hide or defend. But there were also various interesting glitches that I
used to get to interesting spots. First of all, it was possible to clip into
geometry by quickly running forward and backwards on top of a corner. This could
be done in a lot of areas, but eventually was patched out and would crash the
client with an error if detected. Or you would enter a killbox. The other thing
I liked to do was "fly" with my friend. It involved clipping two characters
together and jumping at the same time. As long as no one moved and jumping was
done properly, we would slowly ascend into the air - we could either camp in mid
air or drop down onto some geometry that isn't meant to be reached. That was
fun.

I had many accounts for some reason... I think I was testing out hacks on them.
But the highest ranked one was also a silver stripe, like in Combat Arms. I
don't know if that's a coincidence or if I did it intentionally. It was a fun
game with not many downsides.

There are a few other fps games, but I don't really have much to say about them
except that I spent a lot of time playing and hacking them: GunZ: The Duel,
Alliance of Valiant Arms, Battlefield Heroes, and Battlefield Play4Free.

## league of legends

Of course I played this. It was the cool thing at the time. And it seems to
still be the cool thing, although you have to complain about it, too.

Hmm, how can I explain my time on the game - all I can say is I hit level 30,
then started playing ranked games, eventually hitting 2.1k elo - this was back
when they had the elo system instead of tiers. Ah, now that I think about it I
used to level and sell accounts on this game. God, it's interesting to realize
that I don't have many memories of this game except that I spent a _ton_ of time
on it.

Oh, also I remember I had the opportunity to give feedback on the game once, and
I said something like "stop adding so many champions because only a few will
matter while the rest just sit there!"... I see the game now and I don't even
recognize half of them.

Well, I'm sure the game is still good considering its popularity. I'll do a
little aside for DOTA 2, too as I played that casually with friends. Back then,
I would say League of Legends was a lot simpler and streamlined compared to
DOTA 2. There are mechanics like blocking creeps, disjointing projectiles, turn
speed, micro, and more that you just didn't find in League of Legends that were
present in DOTA 2. But yes, both are fun in their own capacity.

## path of exile

I don't know how I got into this game, but I enjoyed it. I think I played
between the Domination and Ambush leagues, but stopped playing after that
because... grindfest. I did have my Righteous Fire level 100 character by then
and hundreds of exalts so I felt like the game was basically completed for me.

I did get back into the game for Delve and Betrayal, but felt like it was
getting to be pretty complex. Do games without sequels just get too complex
after a certain point in time? Am I getting _old_?

## tera

Ah TERA, I actually [wrote about it](/posts/52) recently because it shut down. I
never truly hit endgame, as the grind is stupid long (random chance upgrades,
limited dungeon entries, content constantly being scaled), but I enjoyed the
game because I had a consistent friend to play with.

## warframe

How about a third (person) shooter? I started playing Warframe on the suggestion
of the same friend who got me into Guild Wars 2! However, this time there were
other people playing the game with us, but that didn't stop me from quitting the
game - the game was unique in terms of movement, but really was a grindfest; we
would try to grind endless void missions for prime blueprints.

Well, I came back a bit later by myself and started playing the game regularly:
I went super meta and started helping with the drop table data mining as it was
important for my try-hardiness. I was able to become pretty good at the game, or
at least find extremely efficient playstyles - kill everything before they can
kill you - and basically rolled the game, achieving basically everything
important to achieve. Here's are some random youtube playlists of videos I took;
by this time I knew it would be a good idea to start recording things!

- PLFcNSaFKsff(sex)-IuJiCg(i)\_ihl_GMf(nein)M9VA
- PLFcNSaFKsff(svn)d(tree)wcpkzuvE96(tres)pogEGHJ(ate)
- PLFcNSaFKsff(for)nNOzhwVFHpU(zed)\_hptVSm(sox)j

Yep, just random gameplay videos and nothing too specific. What is interesting
is how our little data mining team slowly turned into reverse engineering the
client, and this "little" reverse engineering allowed us to stand up our own
private Warframe server (written in PHP no less!) Most of the actual game is in
the client and the server was mainly like a database back then; it was fun to
figure out how to patch the client so it would talk to our server instead. This
also led to some more questionable actions, as we also figured out how to reward
ourselves with whatever we wanted and saving the results _to the official
servers_. When this happened, the figurehead quickly rounded up a few select
people to continue doing this, and other people, including myself, were out.
That didn't stop Digital Extremes from sending a cease and desist to us, well
the figurehead, and stuff happened, but I was not privy to the matter by that
point.

Oh, I also got banned once for hacking, but was able to revert it as support
told me everyone has one freebie, well I guess I won't stretch my luck anymore!

What I enjoyed about the game was the set of unique weapons and mods. I would
spend tons of time trying out new combinations to maximize my damage, and came
across some off-meta choices that were pretty good, or at least until the big
weapon changes that came with a patch. The build was this:

1. Primary - Mutalist Quanta Alternate Fire Spam
    - Combined with Bursting Mass and focusing damage on the alternate fire,
      this ends up being a huge aoe spamming weapon with no self damage. Quite
      convenient for just hitting things in a large area.
2. Secondary - Twin Kohmak
    - An extremely overlooked secondary, basically a crazy but ammo inefficient
      bullet hose.
3. Melee - Plague Kripath
    - A pretty standard melee build, as I just used melee most of the time.
4. Frame - Nekros Prime
    - The frame doesn't really matter, as I did not need survivability or damage
      boosts, so I used Nekros for the unique passive extra loot utility.

These ranged weapons also benefit from a high Riven disposition, which I took
advantage of. Eventually the game does get repetitive and grindy, though. I quit
a little before the release of the Orphix Venom event, as the game really
started to lose a sense of direction - there was a lot of content, but it all
turned out to be very shallow. I did have basically everything that could be had
up to and including Railjacks, but after that it felt like an endless race for
completionists like me. Steam says I have 3k hours, and I feel like the in-game
timer would say around 2k hours in missions. BUT surprise! I'm installing it
right now (or have already installed it), let's see if my Framework can handle
it; I hope there's not too much new stuff to get into.

Some of these games still exist, and some of my accounts do, too. It's crazy to
calculate how much time I've spent messing around on games... It's probably over
a tenth of my current life, and definitely is if we factor in the non-MMO games!

So I did get to check Warframe out a bit before submitting this post, and let's
take a look at some quick screenshots that I took as I renewed myself with it:

![daily reward](/blobs/71/daily.png)

My first daily reward when I come back after a couple years seems to be a 75%
percent off platinum coupon! These are somewhat rare, as I only remember getting
maybe 2 in my years of playing, so I don't know if this is a coincidence or not.
In fact, the first one I got was extremely early on when I started playing the
game, and the last one I got was very near the time I quit the game. Is time a
flat circle? Am I starting to play the game again? And here are my general
stats:

![playtime summary](/blobs/71/summary.png)

2k hours was close and the statistics are nice enough to convert that into days
for us... 79 days! And around 14 hours spent on solving ciphers (a small puzzle
that's part of the game mechanics for unlocking doors); crazy! I see they've
added some new areas since I've gone, as my star chart progress is not maxed
out. I was also assaulted by around 10 new messages for events that occurred
during the time I was out - a lot of things changed so here's some kind of
refund - and ended up with a round a week of free boosters. There does seem to
be a decent amount of new content - at least 3 quest lines. After a little
looking around the game, I came across this:

![ui glitch](/blobs/71/glitched.png)

Uh yeah the game glitched so I had to shut it off. Overall, it does seem like my
low spec laptop can handle it which is interesting because the graphics don't
seem too outdated in my opinion. This may be the game I'll be playing in the
near future!
