# i enjoy helping others run my software

I've been sitting on this post for a bit, and recently someone did reach out to
me for help about running something I was working on so I decided to bash this
out now.

There are several smaller private correspondences that I'll skip over, so the
first one I'd like to start at is
[this somewhat old issue that was made 3 years after I made the repo's last commit](https://github.com/rei2hu/MultiplayerPianoKeysScript/issues/1).

To give the script a quick backstory, there are apps out there that map computer
keyboard keys to piano keys and sites that allow you to "play" piano with other
people through this - multiplayerpiano is one of these sites. Unfortunately,
their mapping did not match what my friends and I were familiar with, so I made
an edit to their script to update it... and then added a ton of random features
like custom sounds and other things like a good dev.

Because the script relied on the site's original script due to being a copy and
paste + modification, when the site updates how it works, the modified script no
longer works as it's based on and old version. I do not know how many people
were using it between 2017 and 2020, but I'll assume it worked up until then.
Considering this, and that the website is bound to update its script in the
future, I decided to provide some detailed instructions on generating the script
manually in addition to an up-to-date version to compare against for longevity.

But looking at the website now, they have a vastly different setup which is
minified and spread across several different files, but also have an unminified
version published and editable on GitHub, so the longevity I was aiming for
didn't end up being very long. I'm just not sure how it can be hooked into
easily without making change requests against the official repository, but could
probably figure something out.

There are also several longer correspondences, where the most recent one was
related to the hosting of a GMTower server. The backstory for this is that
GM(od)Tower was a huge gamemode in Garry's Mod which was eventually shut
down/replaced by Tower Unite due to technical constraints blocking more complex
development efforts. The developers were supposed to open source the code but
hadn't gotten around to it yet (still). Some drama occurred, unofficial servers
were hosted, and eventually some code that seemed legitimate was released, so I
got my hands on it, made
[an org and several repositories](https://github.com/touhou-towers), hosted a
server, and started modding. Well, half a week in and I decided the code was too
low quality to work with and gave up but left the repositories public. I do not
know if the code is official or if it's some kind of reverse engineered backend;
I'd hope it was the latter as it was _extrememly_ terri-bad quality. But it
worked.

Cue 3 years later, someone reached out to me through email to figure out how to
host a server, as they figured I was able to do it based on how I was actively
making changes at the time. I initially approached it lazily, as I thought
figuring it out from scratch again would take some time, and only troubleshooted
the individual errors sent to me. 2 days in and I decided this was going too
slowly and eventually tried setting it up myself - doing so, un-archiving the
repository to update the README with instructions, then re-archiving it. Our
last email exchange went like

> me: I've updated the README with specific instructions, let me know if they
> work
>
> them: and then all I have to do is update the MySQL credentials and create the
> tables?
>
> me: yes

And that was the end.

In all cases, it is nice to know that there are people out there using things
I've had a hand in writing - especially since I don't really write with the
focus of getting users, but rather just open source things because of the small
chance that people can derive some value from my work.

My main gripe would be that there is never really full closure; it seems that
after I pass along enough instructions then I never get confirmation whether or
not things worked - I assume they are not replying because things _did_ work,
but the follow-up confirmation would be nice.
