# failing to gather requirements

Sooo, I think a few months back I made my first "mistake" - building the wrong
thing.

The core problem was that we had an object like this:

```js
{
    x: {
        a: // ...
        b: // ...
        c: // ...
    }
}
```

And I worked on a task that said I want to be able to have multiple `x` and a
few other details. I discussed it a bit with the product manager through text
and came to the conclusion that they were looking for this:

```js
{
    xs: [{
        a: // ...
        b: // ...
        c: // ...
    }, {
        a: // ...
        b: // ...
        c: // ...
    }]
}
```

As I asked if they would like a list of `x` and they said yes.

There were already dependencies on the previous structure in production, so it
required shuffling a lot of the data around so things worked in a backwards
compatible manner. Later on, I get a few mocks from the designer that suggested
that the task was to instead do this

```js
{
    x: {
        a: [ /* ... */ ],
        b: [ /* ... */ ],
        c: [ /* ... */ ],
    }
}
```

And I became very worried. At this time, we tried to get the product manager in
a meeting to clarify things, but it they only joined in our second meeting to
fully discuss things (they did message me later saying that they were scared it
was a meeting where the designer was going to chew them out on the design, a
common occurrence, so they passed on the first one). I learned that they were
looking for the second structure instead. Yikes!

Things could be torn down and we could start from the beginning, or we could
somehow beat the schema into shape. We went with #2, and eventually the code
relied on something like

```js
{
    xs: [{
        a?: // ...
        b?: // ...
        c?: // ...
    }]
}
```

And a table in the database is also shaped like that _shiver_. Now I understand
how people end up making extremely questionable data modeling choices.

Also I think I wrote a post about spamming booleans everywhere? Well, on this
same project I ended up doing something like that; something had two states so I
used a boolean, but then there were three states so I added another boolean, so
one combination of `(boolean, boolean)` is invalid.

It all makes sense... and I hate it (and myself). Well, that project turned out
to be extremely popular and pulled in a good amount of sales and the company is
happy about that. Also that product manager changed positions and is instead
more of an industry expert type role, which makes sense to me.
