# menma's tera cease&desist

Foreword: I am not affiliated with this project in any way.

Menma's TERA is a TERA private server that started around 2021. On May 26/27,
2023, they received a cease and desist from KRAFTON inc., the intellectual
property owner of TERA and shared an announcement that the private server was
shutting down.

> On 20th April, 2022, Gameforge, the publisher of TERA in all regions of PC at
> the time, announced the official shut down of the game as Bluehole Studio, the
> developers of TERA, decided to stop supporting and updating the game.
> Registrations stopped at 31st May, 2022 and the game eventually shut down its
> servers on 30th June, 2022.
>
> Approximately a year later, on Friday, 26th May, 2023, KRAFTON, the parent
> company of Bluehole Studio and owner of Intellectual Property rights on TERA,
> has finally made their move on us.
>
> **It is with a heavy heart, that I am writing this message to announce the
> shut down of the Menma’s TERA Private Server, following a request we have
> received from KRAFTON’s legal department to immediately cease and desist all
> operations of the Menma’s TERA services.**
>
> **On Saturday, 27th May, 2023 at 07:00 AM UTC time, access to the Menma’s TERA
> Game Server and all of our services will be shutting down. Until then you have
> time to get in, take screenshots and videos and relive the last few moments
> before the game goes away.**
>
> Now this is not over just yet, we have accordingly replied to them and
> mentioned our interest in reaching a deal to keep the game running and we are
> hoping to be able to meet somewhere in the middle.
>
> There will be partial refunds of purchases from Menma’s TERA shop that were
> made this month, as well as partial refunds for ongoing TERA Club
> “subscriptions”. We will not be able to do any non-TERA Club refunds for
> purchases made before the 1st of May. Details of the refund process will be
> posted at the end of the month.
>
> Lastly, I just wanted to say that I am really grateful for everyone who has
> been around with us, supported us all this time, we were able to achieve a lot
> thanks to you guys. The current outcome was unfortunately always going to be a
> possibility and I personally always had it in the lower back area of my mind.
> At this point I don’t know what KRAFTON’s goal is with this request. As to my
> knowledge we’re not harming them in any way, the game does not exist at all
> away from private servers, but it is what it is.
>
> To the team, I am very grateful for the work you have put in for this project
> and we have all come so far and improved so much during the past year. Thank
> you guys, truly thank you.
>
> From a person who made this game a big part of his life, even long before this
> project started, to all the players, Thank you for everything.
>
> Much love <3, Menma

Along with a screenshot of the cease and desist email whose contents are:

> I am an attorney for KRATON Inc., the developer and publisher of the video
> game _TERA_ (the "Game" ), and owner of the copyrights, trademarks, and other
> intellectual property rights in the Game and associated material ( "Krafton's
> IP Rights" ).
>
> It has come to our attention that Menma's Tera is offering goods and services
> using Krafton's IP Rights in the Game. Please refer to the attachment, which
> shows some of the unauthorized use of Krafton's IP Rights in Menma's goods and
> services. As Krafton has not granted Menma's Tera permission to use Krafton's
> IP Rights, the unauthorized copying and use of our copyrights and trademarks
> constitutes copyright and trademark infringement.
>
> We demand that you: (1) immediately cease and desist marketing, manufacturing,
> distributing, and/or selling and infringing works, including the
> abovementioned infringing materials; (2) immediately agree in writing that
> neither Menma's Tera nor any other person or entity acting on behalf of or in
> connection with Menma's Tera will directly or indirectly engage in any further
> unauthorized use of Krafton's IP Rights; (3) immediately provide an accounting
> of the infringing product/material that exists and destroy or deliver to us
> for destruction all unauthorized items (e.g., digital images, assets,
> products, etc.) in your possession, custody, or control that include Krafton's
> IP Rights, including from your servers; and (4) immediately identify in
> writing any and all parties that have any unauthorized products/materials that
> include Krafton's IP Rights.
>
> We look forward to receiving your affirmative resposne that you have fully
> complied with the above-stated demands by June 2, 2023. We would like to
> resolve this matter amicably, byt will consider any and all legal action
> necessary to protect its valuable intellectual property rights under federal
> and state law. This letter is written without prejudice to our rights and
> remedies, all of which are expressly reserved.
>
> Should you wish to discuss this with me please contact me directly.

5 hours later, the announcement is edited, removing the image and Menma
announces that they will not be complying with the cease and desist.

> We've been talking internally about what happened earlier since this morning.
> It's been a hard day for a lot of us, but none of us wanted to give up. We
> thought this was the end for us. Shortly after the announcement, we witnessed
> the overwhelming support from our community both on our Discord and in-game.
> This support moved us, and the management team has been in call for hours
> talking and trying to come up with the proper solution.
>
> We will not accept this outcome. We will not give up here, and the Menma's
> TERA story will not end in the foreseeable future.
>
> We will continue fighting for the TERA as it always should have been: the TERA
> you deserve.
>
> --
>
> **There will be a server maintenance on May 27, 2023 2:00 AM for an
> approximate 2-3 hours. During the maintenance the server will be rolled back
> to approximately the time of the previous announcement (May 26, 2023 5:18 PM /
> a day ago) to account for any damages done to the game following the
> announcement (like people deleting their everything, etc...). The server will
> be coming right up after this is done. WE ARE NOT SHUTTING DOWN.**
>
> The Menma's TERA Shop will remain closed for the time being while we explore
> further concerns, considerations, and options.
>
> Thank you for being the best, Menma, Night, Icha, Hail

I think it will be interesting to see what happens next, as I'm not familiar
with any cases where private servers/modders did not comply with cease and
desist letters.

Of course, my personal opinion on private servers is that they should be fair
game when there are no official servers running; as is the case for TERA. It
should also be noted that there are other private servers that are running, but
none have received similar actions as far as I know; Menma's TERA is the largest
one out there. The friend that brought this to my attention hypothesizes that
this is due to the recent real money shop that was implemented for Menma's TERA,
but who knows - I believe they were still making money off of TERA Club, the
game's original premium subscription service.
