# framework gaming and menma's tera

Recently Framework announced the Framework 16 laptop which comes with an
upgradeable graphics module. This would be perfect for me except I happened to
purchase a Framework 13 late last year and am too cheap to purchase a new laptop
just because. My hope is that they offer some kind of upgrade kit that would
allow me to transform my existing Framework components into one that supports
the modifiable graphics module, though I assume that's very difficult because of
hardware limitations or something. Unfortunate.

Anyways, recently I have been looking for something to do and I decided to try
out Menma's TERA as I have a friend that did play it. I was afraid it would not
run well on a laptop that only had integrated graphics, but it was able to work
well reaching over 100 fps after tweaking config settings and applying
dxvk.However, after a few days of playing, the laptop was prone to overheating
after a few minutes of gameplay. A log of the temperature sensors showed that
the CPU and GPU were both reaching temperatures of 100C which caused them to
throttle themselves.

A closer observation of the temperature trends and previous experience lead me
to believe the problem mainly had to do with the CPU. I took a random shot in
the dark by searching for 0.4GHz online and it ended up yielding some good
information - it was a thermal issue. Turns out Intel CPUs have something called
Turbo Boost technology which does the following:

> Intel® Turbo Boost Technology can potentially increase CPU speeds up to the
> Max Turbo Frequency while staying within safe temperature and power limits.
> This can increase performance in both single-threaded and multi-threaded
> applications (programs that utilize several processor cores).

I believe the solution would be disabling this, which can be done through the
BIOS. I also knew that I could sacrifice performance because the game
performance was already above standards (when things weren't overheating).
Turning off the option worked. I'm able to play at a consistent 45 fps.

It turns out that there is also another way to disable turbo boost, which is
setting the maximum processor state for advanced power options to something less
than 100%, like 99%. I guess it makes sense but is weirdly not officially
documented anywhere. Also trying to reach those settings is a little chore on
Windows navigation menus as I had to go through the control panel.
