# framework gaming and baldur's gate 3

I just finished my first playthrough of Baldur's Gate 3 and thought I'd leave a
couple of thoughts about the game. This will cover random topics including
performance because I run a relatively low-powered setup: a Framework Laptop 13
with a 12th Gen Intel i5-1240P which comes with Intel Iris Xe Graphics. I knew
getting this laptop was a risk to gaming ability but decided to get it anyways
based on reviews/marketing saying that the integrated graphics was decent for
gaming. As you can guess, I was able to play through Baldur's Gate 3 with this
card, although not without issues. Foreword: I enjoyed the game though all I
will do is point out issues.

Originally I planned to play through the game with a couple of friends, and we
were playing it a few hours every day religiously. Unfortunately a disagreement
by the other players over a dialogue option led to a stopping of that - when
dialogue is forced upon the party as a scripted event, the nearest character
gets to make the choices; the evil paladin ended up picking the "side with evil
and slaughter everyone" option, in line with his character, which the ranger
kleptomaniac did not agree with, and we restarted that fight several times with
the good dialogue option. The kicker is that we could not with the good fight
and ended up going with the evil option anyways. I'd estimate we were around 60%
through Act 1. Either way, we stopped playing regularly so I started a
singleplayer campaign which took around 70 hours to complete (but more due to
reloads) following a relatively heroic path and doing most of the quests. I

Act 1 is optimized quite well; I was very concerned that my laptop could not
handle the game but using the lowest quality settings and one of the lowest
available resolutions: 1024x768, the game was able to run at around 15-20 fps
(and at a toasty 90c), which is playable for a turn based rpg. Unfortunately,
the game's interface is not designed for this resolution (or any 4:3 resolution
for that matter) and is cut off, causing a few problems. The story at this point
is very relatively straightforward and I didn't run into too many continuity
issues, as things are gated by combat ability, and it would be too difficult to
be overleveled at this point.

Act 2 is where problems started appearing. Immediately after entering one of the
main areas of this act, my frames started tanking and I thought finishing the
game would be unbearable due to this issue. Fortunately, I came across a fix:
tactical camera (default key: o). For one reason or another, this seems to
remove the particle effects and also lower the texture quality more which served
me well throughout the rest of the game (though not always). Tactical camera
also makes the game more difficult to play due to the top-down view sometimes
hiding range indicators, or making you click on higher floors, and in general
making it difficult to transition between indoors and outdoors.

This act is also where the quests start getting convoluted; it's very likely you
will explore many areas before receiving the quest to actually do so, making you
miss out on various pieces of content. These problems, gameplay and performance,
are only exacerbated in Act 3, where you probably hit the level cap around a
quarter of the way in if you explored enough in the earlier 2 acts.

And then there is also the final gauntlet of fights, where everything can turn
truly terrible. The performance is abysmal, and even worse considering that I've
been playing for a bit to get to this point. In fact, if the performance is bad
enough, characters' apparel don't even load in so many of them appear naked
(including naked Withers!) it game and also in cutscenes, including the final
ones. Also playing at the lowest quality settings makes it extremely hard to see
certain area of effect markers which can lead to a quick death in a portion of
this gauntlet.

I also think the tactician AI takes a long time to think of moves for enemies
which makes fights with a lot of them a waitfest. Compared to the AI in
Divinity: Original Sin 2, it seems like BG3 AI is much less creative but takes
the same amount or longer time to think of moves.

Another common issue that occurred would be lingering AOEs after fights that
lasted into, interrupted, or even fully prevent cutscenes - a large one is
silence which prevents most spells from being cast and is quite useful in
combat, but will also prevent many important quest related cutscenes/dialogue
from triggering if relevant characters are silenced. Even removing silence
afterwards will not trigger these events. Furthermore, it is possible that a
character will walk into a lingering damage field during a cutscene, thinking
you've attacked them, and initiating combat. Fortunately there is non-lethal
mode so you can just knock them out and they do seem to trigger cutscenes after
doing so (though they're supposed to be knocked out.)

Also, while the story was good, the need to long rest (sometimes in certain
areas) to progress quests or unlock certain parts of the story is pretty
unreasonable as you can miss out on things if you don't long rest enough but can
also miss out on things if you long rest too much. don't think I long rested at
all during the first act, which lead to a ton of cutscenes before the transition
to act 2 and dumped a lot of plot points at once. It would be nicer if you could
just go to camp and trigger cutscenes manually.

Overall, all things considered, I enjoyed the game. I don't consider graphics
very highly when rating a game, and the story and gameplay are good. The fact
that I can even play this game says something about either the performance or
the integrated graphics card I have. I also believe there is still a solid
amount of content to play through with an evil playthrough.
