# the coin flip example

As I finish the monad section, I ran into a problem with the final coin flipping
example. You are given instances for both `Functor` and `Monad` but are missing
one for `Applicative` and I was unable to run the example without defining it first.
And here came the first time I defined an instance myself.

I'll just show the entire definition (I'm quite proud of it) and then explain how
I arrived at it (the apply might not be the most proper implementation/idea for it):

<!-- markdownlint-disable line-length -->
```haskell
instance Applicative Prob where
    pure = return
    (Prob fs) <*> (Prob xs) = Prob $ getZipList $ ZipList (map (first . fst) fs) <*> ZipList xs
```
<!-- markdownlint-enable line-length -->

For `pure` it was pretty straightforward where I would do the same `return` for
the `Monad` instance. However, `<*>` was much tougher to think of. I started working
off the type:

```haskell
-- (<*>) :: f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
-- (<*>) :: Prob (a -> b) -> Prob a -> Prob b
-- example of Prob (a -> b) is
--  Prob [(\x -> succ x, 1 % 1), (\x -> pred x, 1 % 1)]
-- example of Prob a is just the normal probabilities
```

So I ended up interpreting this as just transform each possibility with a function
without regard to the probability paired to the function (actually writing this
now, I think I know a better interpretation). It just so happens that I remembered
learning about ZipList earlier in `learnyouahaskell` and put them to work here.
I started out with this:

```haskell
ZipList (map fst fs) <*> ZipList (map fst xs)
```

But then I realized I was tossing the probabilities. I didn't want to write something
complicated to be able to apply the function to the first element of a tuple, so
I went to hoogle and searched for `(a -> b) -> (a, c) -> (b, c)` and surprisingly
enough `first` came up. After a small amount of testing, it seemed to be what I
wanted so I ended up modifying my implementation
and tacking on the `Prob` constructor, giving what I ended up with:

```haskell
Prob $ getZipList $ ZipList (map (first . fs)) <*> ZipList xs
```

Anyways, that worked out nicely and kind of makes sense although now I think the
way it should've been implemented was to use the probability to calculate the chance
it would've been applied to the possibility for example:

```haskell
Prelude> let fs = Prob [(\x -> succ x, 1 % 4), (\x -> pred x, 1 % 4), (id, 1 % 2)]
Prelude> let xs = Prob [('a', 1 % 2), ('b', 1 % 2)]
```

We can see here that for `xs` there's a probability that you get `a` half the time
and `b` the other half of the time. If you apply `fs` to `xs` you should end up with:

```haskell
Prelude> fs <*> xs
Prob [('b', 1 % 8), ('c', 1 % 8),
    ('`', 1 % 8), ('a', 1 % 8),
    ('a', 1 % 4), ('b', 1 % 4)]
```

I split it up into 3 lines just to show but basically it would be you have a chance
to pick one of the functions and a chance to pick one of the elements and what is
the chance you pick a pair of them. Well I already wrote the other one and that
took me 30 minutes so who knows how long this one will take? I think it's very similar
to `>>=` so some kind of shortcut could be used, similar to how I used `return`
to define `pure`. Well I won't bother writing it anyways.
