# first travel vacation thoughts and lessons

I went on a vacation outside of my small town for the first time in my life this
year. It was actually work related, but I talked my way into scheduling some
time off afterwards for a vacation. The main benefit of this was that my company
covered the flight and a few days at a hotel, though I had to pay for the rest
of the days.

For privacy reasons, I'll try not to reveal any direct information about my
trip. I will also round and factorize costs - 1@ represents a certain amount of
money and will be the base unit for expenses.

The first thing I messed up was planning the trip itself. Because the company
was covering travel, I opted to book a return flight for Monday instead of
Sunday in an attempt to be cheap because I don't take advantage of other
people's money. This saved the company 12@ but ultimately cost me 61@ for an
extra night at the hotel, and I didn't realize it during planning...

The entire trip lasted 1 week, and I only packed electronic devices, toiletries,
and clothes. What I forgot was a container for water, like a simple water
bottle. I ended up having to buy overpriced water so I had a bottle I could
refill throughout the vacation. I also packed extra clothes including clothes
not fit for the weather; both did not come in handy but I think it could still
be valuable.

Travel was uneventful, I had some very boring several hour layovers but got
through them with books and computers. That's the downside of living in a small
city I guess - no direct flights.

Seeing the metropolis for the first time was a shock - the public infrastructure
there was much better and the area in general was very well maintained compared
to my own town. Of course, there is the homeless issue which exists in many
large cities, but I wouldn't say it was much worse than what I would see back
home. The public transportation was abundant, clean, and very easy to use. I was
able to take an hour long train ride from the airport to a station a few blocks
away from the hotel. I was also able to take rides to the other various
destinations I planned on visiting. It's possible there are some optimizations
being made here to support tourists, though.

After checking in and dropping my luggage off in my room, I went out to eat
dinner. My first meal was at a nearby hotel's restaurant and I had a sandwich
and some soup. The total came out to 8@, which is around 50% what I would expect
a meal to cost in my town. A 20% service charge AND the fact that I tip around
20% and some change to obtain certain numbers meant I ended up paying an extra
45% on top of the base cost. So, I spent over twice as much as I usual when
eating out (the company would cover the base cost of that meal as it was during
the work related days). But the price was still surprising to me - it was the
first time I truly experienced the difference in cost of living between areas.
The food wasn't to my taste either, but I'm not a picky eater.

This high cost trend wouldn't really continue, as the hotel meal turned out to
be my most expensive one. I ended up spending around 90@ on food in total. There
were a few stand out costs like non-alcoholic drinks costing 3@ but I'd chalk it
up to the specialization. In general meals costed from 5@ to 6@ which seemed
reasonable for the area. My second most expensive meal would be 7@, though that
was technically breakfast and some leftovers for the airport. I would also eat
at an airport, and I believe that airport food would be expensive as my parents
never let us buy anything at airports but it was actually quite close in cost to
food purchased outside the airport.

One unexpected thing was that all food/drink establishments in this area
required providing your email for a receipt. I opted not to provide an email.

I spent around 25@ on entertainment, which covered the standard tourist
attractions, and also visited other areas like the local university, parks, and
walking trails which were free. I guess the experiences were decent, but
honestly a lot of the paid attractions seemed overpriced for what they were. I
did not take pictures or buy souvenirs, perhaps I should have? In retrospect,
no - these memories are not that important. However, after experiencing what the
city had to offer, I understand why people want to live in big metropolises; at
least early on in their adult lives. However, I question how much of the fun was
due to everything being new and if I would still enjoy it after months or years.

My total costs came out to around 400@ for everything, not including what the
company covered, with over half of that for just the extra hotel days. This is
crazy to me because that's maybe 3 or 4 months of typical expenses spent in a
week. On the other hand, that's the amount of money that is gained or lost by my
investments in a normal market day. I'm not sure if I can justify another travel
vacation or not - especially one that's not covered by my employer.

So what would I do differently if I could redo things?

1. Not wasting money by trying to save the company money
    - Added an extra day to save money, but had to pay for hotel
2. Bring basic containers and/or water bottles
    - Bought overpriced water
3. Not wasting time by trying to save the company money
    - Scheduled some long layover flights
    - Schedule a red-eye flight
4. Look for cheaper accommodations
    - I extended my stay at the hotel my company booked, but it seemed quite
      expensive

Overall, I think it went well if not a little expensive. But that could by my
frugal brain talking after decades of being poor.
