# asking dall-e 3 to generate sheet music

Microsoft recently provided free access to DALL-E 3 through Bing's new Image
Creator feature. [Previously](/posts/80) we looked at chatGPT's attempt to
generate virtual piano music. I decided to see if I could get a picture of sheet
music from it.

So I gave it the following prompt:

> sheet music for canon in c using virtual piano's musical notation

It generated 4 images; let's take a look at them.

![piano and town](/blobs/82/canonc1.png)

The only relevant thing in this image is the piano. However, the keys of the
piano are inaccurate as the black keys should be in groups of 2 then 3. I don't
know how it decided to generate the rest of the picture from the prompt but it
is what it is. And it looks nice.

![piano surrounded by tendrils of music](/blobs/82/canonc2.png)
![another piano surrounded by tendrils of music](/blobs/82/canonc4.png)

Here we have a piano and what looks like lines of music. However a closer look
and we will see that most of these only look like notes - there are various
imperfections that make them look wrong, even simple things like the note heads
being only somewhat round. It's still a nice image to look at and I love how one
of the tendrils floating upwards is made of piano keys.

The notes in the other image are even worse, unfortunately.

![a river in a city with piano keys in the foreground](/blobs/82/canonc3.png)

Here we have another town, dare I call it AI London, with inaccurate piano keys
in the foreground. One interesting thing I'll note here is the clock faces which
are not actually clock faces, or at least not the kind I'm familiar with.

I wasn't sure if DALLE-3 didn't understand the concept of sheet music, or if my
initial prompt had too much cruft around it to generate an image of it, so I
tried something more straightforward:

> sheet music for twinkle twinkle little star for violin

And it generated another 4 images.

![four ai generated images that each show measures and a
violin](/blobs/82/twinklesheet.png)

On the top left picture, there is a picture of sheet music on a bed, but the
contents of the sheet are messed up. In fact, in all the pictures, like before
the notes do not look like notes; we can also see that the treble cleft is
messed up a couple of times, though the fact that it uses a treble cleft which
is what appears in violin sheet music is amazing - unless I ask it about
something like cello music, which uses bass cleft, and it continues to draw
trebles. The lines are actually lined up in the images, so it looks more like
sheet music in that sense, too. There is also the attempt to include some
musical terms and symbols outside the notes though most of it is incoherent.
This is all pretty cool except none of these notes are for twinkle twinkle
little star.

I ended up thinking perhaps musical notation was too tough to generate and tried
to generate text instead.

> the first page of a mystery horror novel

![four ai generated images of a book opened to the first page with the text the
hillwood manor](/blobs/82/horrorbook.png)

It was hoping for a page filled with text, but it instead gave what I would
expect from a book cover printed on the first page of the book. All of the books
seem to be called the Hillwood Manor (with varying degrees of spelling) and any
attempt of text outside of "it was a dark and stormy night" is illegible, which
can only be seen in the top right image. I guess it's not that good at text
either? It is interesting that all of these books have the same content; I do
not know if this is because they were generated in the same batch or for some
other reason.

At least all of the hands are spot on as funny hands/appendages was previously
an issue for image generation... Actually I'm not too sure about the top right
hand; it looks correct but is holding the book in a very weird way.

Unfortunately the service is severely overloaded or bugged, as I have several
prompts that have been processing for a few hours while re-submissions of those
prompts have completed. The pending generations have locked me out from
submitting any further prompts so I cannot test any further for now.

But I maintain my opinion; generative AI is bad at precision details. Music
notes will be core to my evaluation criteria from now on - it's like text for
sounds.
