# custom domains + catch-all emails + sieve

A while back I decided to [write about](/posts/43) my $free^{TM}$ email
forwarding setup. In short, it uses a network of emails across multiple services
like gmail and outlook to move mail from various "edge" accounts to central ones
where emails are read.

Somewhat recently, Google announced an
[inactive account policy](https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/12418290)

> An inactive Google Account is an account that has not been used within a
> 2-year period. Google reserves the right to delete an inactive Google Account
> and its activity and data if you are inactive across Google for at least two
> years.

This means that some accounts in the network might be deleted, though there
should be a notification if this was going to happen. Either way, I decided it
was finally time to migrate off of the service. I went with Proton and recently
upgraded to Unlimited after some time with Mail Plus. I could go into the
reasons of Proton over other services like Fastmail and Tutanota, but that's
enough shilling in this article. The relevant bit is that the service has custom
domains, catch-all emails, and supports sieve.

Our goal is hard to connect email aliases so we need an email service that has
support for aliases - both for sending and receiving. For example, I could set
up these emails:

- jrhett2003@protonmail.com
- rhondajmackenzie@proton.me
- strengthbeyondbelief@pm.me
- 3birdsin1nest@protonmail.com
- 1337g4m3r@pm.me

And an outside observer would be very hard-pressed to find some kind of
connection between them; all they would know is these are 4 emails from a widely
used email service. Of course Proton the company could figure it out if they
wanted to, but the point is that there's no reason to. These are prime emails
for setting up separate online personas, which is great for your privacy... as
long as the personas don't mirror your real life.

Creating aliases like this is all nice and good, but in most email services'
cases, there will be a hard cap on the number of aliases you can make depending
on your plan. This is where custom domains and catch-alls come in.

Custom domain support means the email service will let you set up and receive
emails for a domain you own. Now instead of all those custom endings, you can
have one.

- jrhett2003@sail.boats
- rhondajmackenzie@sail.boats
- strengthbeyondbelief@sail.boats
- 3birdsin1nest@sail.boats
- 1337g4m3r@sail.boats

But isn't this less secure because they all belong to the same domain? Yes, it's
easier to connect these emails together, and back to you UNLESS the email
attached to your real online persona does not use this domain. In fact, these
emails will also take up your alias limit despite being under your own domain.
So why use custom domains? Because hopefully catch-all emails are supported.

A catch-all email will allow you to receive email from _any_ address in your
domain, and only takes up one alias slot. This means you can hand out as many
addresses as you want and _receive_ email sent to them. The downside is you
cannot send email as them, so this will be used for scenarios where receiving is
the only priority. But using a catch-all email also means that it will, well,
catch all incoming emails. And organizing the incoming email can be a pain. Some
services allow dropping emails _if_ you make an alias for a specific address
then disable it, but it's a lot of work to do this. Instead sieve filters can be
used.

Sieve is like scripting for emails, and in our case we can use it to handle
emails programmatically as they come in. For example, what we're interested in
is doing the following:

1. Whitelisting certain addresses for your custom domain
2. Tagging or forwarding emails

And it's as simple as something like this

```txt
require "fileinto";

if address :is :domain "to" "sail.boats" {
    if address :is :localpart "to" "1337g4m3r" {
        fileinto "gaming";
    } elsif address :is :localpart "to" "rhondajmackenzie" {
        fileinto "beauty";
    } else {
        fileinto "possible spam";
        # you could also just discard the message
        # discard;
    }
}
```

It's not the cleanest "code" (_cough_ please separate data and logic _cough_)
but it gets the job done. Sieve also offers a lot more than just this, but the
documentation is kind of sparse and testing is **very** annoying. I'm happy
enough with this level of quality because it gets the job done and is easy to
extend.

So in summary, I use the service's domains to set up aliases that I have to
reply from, and I submit custom domain addresses when I only plan to receive
email. A setup like:

- realmainaccount@pm.me
- persona1@protonmail.com
- persona2@proton.me
- persona3@pm.me
- persona4@protonmail.com
- specificthing@pm.me
- specificthing2@proton.me
- something@custom1.com (catch-all for custom1.com)
- something@custom2.com (catch-all for custom2.com)
- something@custom3.com (catch-all for custom3.com)

And so on.

I will also caution that domains themselves typically cost money to own (make
sure you use a reputable registrar so you can keep control over the domain) so
that approach might not be ideal for those with less disposable income. If you
do plan on using a custom domain, make sure it supports domain privacy or else
the information you use to register the domain will be available to a simple
WHOIS request.

Also as an second aside, I would suggest not directly using the name of thing
you're using the address for in the address e.g.
`streaming-service@custom-domain.com` strictly because if someone obtains the
email then they know what it's used for. I instead use an opaque or randomly
generated name, and have a comment or logic in my sieve filter that lets me know
what it was for e.g.

```txt
# disney streaming
if address :is :localpart "to" "81r3wiqj" {
    fileinto "streaming service"
}

# ...

# credit card
if address :is :localpart "to" "rj13ioa" {
    fileinto "master card"
}
```

When someone sees `81r3wiqj@custom-domain.com` then they have no idea what it's
for, and when someone sees `rj13ioa@custom-domain.com` or `rj13ioa@proton.me`
then they won't know it's for your credit card account.

> Surely the boss was being a bit paranoid. "I heard that thought," screeched
> Opal. "I am not paranoid!"
>
> ...
>
> Had Miss Koboi really intercepted the thought? Or was it just the paranoia
> again? After all, paranoid people usually believe that everyone thinks they
> are paranoid.

I may be a little paranoid, but I think a small dose of paranoia is needed when
it comes to think about privacy. It's relatively crazy how it's being invaded
nowadays.

## a coincidence?

I also ended up receiving my first spam email (that passed through the usual
spam filters) at the address I use as the contact point for this website.

While the address could have been guessed or picked up off this website, I'm
more inclined to believe that it was scraped from GitHub commit information, as
I also use that address when making commits to this website's repository.

It just goes to show where people pick up information from, I guess.

Actually, I believe it's because I replaced a gmail address with this one in a
github action's step's environment variable `GIT_EMAIL`. I assume gmail's
filters were previously blocking most spam messages before they could be
forwarded.
