# 'we saved x time with y'\*

\* across a bajillion users.

I was recently reading the article
[How Core Web Vitals saved users 10,000 years of waiting for web pages to load](https://blog.chromium.org/2023/11/how-core-web-vitals-saved-users-10000.html)
this year and I realized that I'm not really a fan of total time saved across
all users as a metric. This is not a jab at the Chrome team specifically, but in
general, but I'll be using this as an example.

10.000 years of time is a great number, but what's the impact for individual
users? Well that translates into around 315.576.000.000 seconds, and there are
estimates up to
[3.3 billion](https://atlasvpn.com/blog/more-than-3-billion-internet-users-now-use-the-google-chrome-browser)
users as of 2021. To be generous, I'll say there are only 1 billion users, so
the time saved per person is a lot higher. This translates to, on average, 315
seconds or 5 minutes saved per user per year.

Of course, there are both heavy and light users of the browser, so I'd be fine
saying something like a heavy user saves 100x of the time a normal user saves,
so 500 minutes a year. However, the savings of a heavy user should be spread
somewhat evenly over the year because they're constantly using and saving time,
so they save like 2 minutes a day. What is someone going to do with 2 extra
minutes in their day? And I think I've been pretty generous with the numbers so
in reality it's much less than 2 minutes for most people.

I just don't find it fair to aggregate on time for some reason. Choosing another
statistic like electricity saved or something else would be much better, though
that's harder to use in this specific case. I'm not sure why I have qualms with
time though, perhaps it's because it only goes forward and one person's time is
so different from another person's that I don't think they should be combined.
Maybe because saving 5 minutes a day for 364 days doesn't mean you suddenly have
an extra 30 hours you can redeem at the end of the year. Using aggregate time is
some kind of embellishment technique to look good in my opinion.

I don't mean to dunk on anyone's work that uses this metric to communicate
success, but rather the presentation itself.
