# personal yearly reflection 4

Last year:

> Well, there's a chance I won't be able to post this exactly on Decemeber first
> because I don't feel the normal drive to write it but we'll see.

Au contraire, I have the motivation this year. In fact, I wrote this a few weeks
before December 1st and agonized over trying to find things to write about.

## recap

### remote work

I'm still remote and work has picked up, though it's more of an end of the
quarter/year crunch than in general. I guess UX designer and PM bottlenecks are
commonplace as they exist everywhere, and there's not much I can do about it
personally. I'm more content with my current living situation compared to last
year, so that improves the quality of the environment when working remotely.

### seniority

I got the fancy senior software engineer title. Do I feel a large change from
before? Not really. One interesting thing is that I stopped caring so much...
which is weird. If I had to summarize what has changed over my entire time it
would be my opinion on quality:

1. starting out - build something that works
2. middle - ok be super careful about what I write because someone else will
   have to deal with this in the future
3. now - be less careful because I'm wasting time worrying about every scenario

Title inflation? Damn, it could be - but the fact is that I have consistently
received a 20% raise annually across all jobs so maybe I am good. At least from
a business perspective. Productive. And I secretly look at other people who
already have the senior title and see some doing virtually nothing, or shipping
features that start out and stay broken for months, or that don't know how
figure out basic things, like if a dependency injection framework is making two
instances or one (you can just check them for equality in this case because
Java). Yeah, maybe the title at my current company is not to be taken seriously.
And if I'm this upset about incompetence maybe I shouldn't have it.

### blog stats

I've definitely written a lot more this year, though topic-wise I believe it's
less technical and is more hobbyist - I would only classify maybe 3 to 5 of them
as technical while the rest are for fun. I've written 27 the first year, 20, 18,
then this year's 23. It seems somewhat consistent, though I think last year I
only wrote because I forced myself to.

I also made many updates to the website layout, like change history and other
things that I don't remember. That was quite fun, though whenever I make a
change to the build process I always worry that I'm breaking some previous entry
due to some edge case. What are tests? In fact, I realized I had some pages with
broken formatting when trying to update the build process a few days ago. I plan
to start using some better commit messages since those are displayed in the
history bits at the bottom, but I'd hate to break the trend of "add post" and
"update post". Maybe I'll start doing it after 100 posts. Or maybe I won't - I
don't know if summarizing the changes in a single message will play well.

As for spelling... turns out vim has spellcheck built in, so I just had to turn
it on. It's not perfect, and I don't know what it's built on, but it catches
some typos often.

### last year's goal summary

1. Look into places to move to - good, happy with where I'm at now. But I may
   consider buying a house in the next few years if prices and rates cool
2. Look for a more fulfilling job - good enough, I'll be less invested in my job
   next year for reasons discussed below
3. Relationships - decent, reconnected with some friends I've known for over a
   decade and have a good time with them
4. Solo trip somewhere - [I did it](/posts/81). Fun to do but expensive as hell,
   also the sudden increase in spending affected my credit score... goodbye 800+
5. Drink water - decent
6. Sleep on time - very good, basically waking up fully rested every single day

### school

I think I said somewhere that graduate school is mainly for the degree. And I
still believe that. However, it also gives me the chance to learn things
formally, which, in conjunction with other factors like my free time, gave me a
big enough reason to go for it (and why not pick up a diploma on the journey).
Anyways, I think this might take a lot of my future free time up for the next
year or two and I'm looking forward to it. I'll still be working a full-time job
so it should take up some of my existing free time.

I'll also, most likely, have "smarter" topics to write about in addition to
using my [puzzles](/puzzles) section, tex, and tikz features more often.

### being online/on a computer

For some reason I've become less active online. Back when I was in school, I
would spend the 8+ hours outside of it on a computer - either working on
projects, gaming, or chatting with others.

Now? After getting off of work, I read some things online, watch some shows, or
chat with some friends. My observation of these activities are that they are
much less involved (passive) than things like gaming and projects, and I'm
interested in the cause. Some introspection yielded a few hypothesis, for
example:

- Since I'm working now, I must be tired so I do less active things after
    work. This is most likely not true because work is not draining and I'm not
    low on energy afterwards.
- In terms of projects, I work solo and for myself. Previously I would either
    work on small teams and have actual users, and I was beholden to them. All
    my recent projects have either been for personal interest or for friends to
    use so this makes sense.
- For gaming, one thing I realized is that when I plan to replay a game I
    think about the beginning sections and feel like they're a chore - do I
    really need to spend 1+ hours to ramp up to the main gameplay? This is
    mainly an issue around "offline" games, and I don't know how to fix this
    thinking. As for multiplayer games, I can't find anything interesting to
    play and only play with friends. Therefore, I can only play new
    single-player games, but my low-powered setup doesn't allow that too often.

I used to think my father was boring since he would come home and just watch TV,
but now I'm doing the same thing. I must look for a new hobby or else I'll be
very hypocritical or just boring.

### cooking

My attitude towards cooking so far has been to basically throw random things
together into a stew, or in a stir fry. It suits me because it's simple,
filling, cheap, and probably nutritious with the correct ingredients. However,
I've been watching a ton of cooking shows and I think I'd like to improve my
cooking related skills.

At its core, I think cooking is a mix of a scientific/engineering discipline.
There are recipes, techniques, and experimentation. The only reason it's not
taken seriously is because at the end of the day it's just food which most
likely will not advance society, and recipes that relatively untrained people
can follow exist. Imagine if a layperson could read blueprints for a building
and build it from scratch - I'm sure that would have some effect on whoever's
job it is to do that.

Furthermore, you get to enjoy the fruits of your labor, literally! Though I
think cooking might be an "expensive" hobby at the later levels.

### gardening

There's also gardening, which I'd like to do for the same reasons as cooking,
but it has a longer timeline and I don't know if I'm interested in doing it
without a large, fixed area that would come with the purchase of a home.

I could try growing smaller plants, though, but I don't know.

### new goals

1. Maintain my current lifestyle quality
    - What can I say? I'm content in life. I could chase the peak but I'm not
      too interested in doing that when it comes to quality of life.
2. Do well in school
    - I'm not sure if I ever brought this up, but when I attended university for
      undergrad, I skipped _a lot_ of my general education courses, and was
      generally unorganized - literally missed a final exam because I didn't
      bother checking the dates - which ended up putting my scholarships at risk
      due to a poor GPA in the first semester. But I got things together and
      saved it; things became a lot easier once I was taking classes related to
      my major as I was actually interested in them.
3. Learn new recipes/improve cooking techniques
    - As explained above, I think cooking falls under engineering/science so I
      am interested in practicing it. Also I think I need a hobby to fill the
      time that's not just watching shows, though I'll also be attending school
      so I might not have the time to do that.
4. Drink water (habitual)
5. Sleep on time (habitual)
