# various commonalities for productive programming

I've done a lot of projects in a lot of different stacks, and I think being
proficient in several foundational skills is necessary for writing code or
making changes to an existing code base effectively.

1. Familiarity with language instructions
    - At their cores, most, if not all, modern languages should have 4 classes
      of instructions:

        1. Memory manipulation (variables, assignment, etc)
        2. Logic/math (addition, subtraction, conditionals)
        3. Control flow (if statements, switch case, etc)
        4. Functions

      Figuring out how to do these things in a new stack is necessary for your
      project to work out.
2. Having a good generic lightweight text editor
    - Maybe you're a Java programmer who heavily relies on IntelliJ and suddenly
      have Lua, C#, JavaScript, Haskell, and APL projects on your hands and you
      can't just rely on IntelliJ anymore. Instead of finding several IDEs and
      setting them up individually, instead find something that can be used for
      them all. It could be Visual Studio Code, which has a nice extension
      system or even something more low level like Notepad++. And make sure to
      be good at navigating project files with basic tools like a find tool over
      search by reference since the latter may not always work.
3. Having a fast way to test small code changes
    - Sometimes you may not know the internals of how a language works and want
      to run a small example to figure things out since that's faster than
      finding it in the documentation. Some languages provide a read-eval-print
      loop (REPL) that can do this, while others may allow you to hot reload
      code. Getting quick answers to simple questions is quite important when
      you're starting out and avoiding an entire build or compile step when you
      make changes helps a lot.
4. Being able to debug and/or have runtime introspection
    - In a similar vein, figuring out how to debug your application while it's
      running is also important. Some people deride debugging with log
      statements, but it's a technique that's applicable in many, many stacks.
      You can use it to check the execution flow or variables; it's actually
      very useful and a lot easier than figuring out how to attach and utilize
      an actual debugger with a new stack.
5. Being a fast typist
    - It's programming, when you write code, you're typing. And I specifically
      mean without extra tools like IntelliSense since that's not always
      reliable in these cases. Of course, I'm aware that there are some people
      who cannot type and code through other means like through voice but what
      I'm trying to say is that putting words on the screen should not be the
      limiting factor when you're programming.
6. Familiarity with the command line
    - Most tools are just an abstraction over things that could be done on the
      command line. When you don't have an IDE where all you have to do is press
      F5 or F6 to compile and debug, you'll have to figure out how to do the
      same steps in the command line.

If I was to expand and put down some more arbitrary criteria and anecdotes:

1. If you rely solely on those 4 classes of instructions, you may end up with
   code that is "ugly" or "verbose". There may not be any issue with it
   logic-wise, but makes future changes and maintenance more difficult. I would
   suggest familiarizing yourself with a few concepts which will make things
   easier down the line:

    - composition
    - encapsulation
    - recursion
    - pure functions
    - data structures

   You should also learn about common higher order functions like map and
   filter; at least how they apply to arrays and lists, string operations like
   find include contains, and regular expressions.
2. My first IDE was Visual Studio 200X which I used for writing C++ (because a
   tutorial told me to do so) but when I started other things I switched to
   Notepad++ since I was remote accessing a server and doing development
   directly in it. Nowadays I use Vim, but I only utilize basic navigation and
   editing operations in addition to macros - it works out well especially since
   IDEs typically come with Vim plugins nowadays to bring those keys over, and
   Vim has a cleaner extension system than before.
3. Nothing much to add here, a lot of it depends on the stack. You can either
   have a small skeleton program that is quick to compile, or look for tooling
   that helps you.
4. As I mentioned, logging is applicable in many cases but other times less so.
   Depending on your project, you may be interested in figuring out how to
   access information in another way through things like attaching a debugger,
   reading memory manually or performing packet inspections through something
   like Wireshark.
5. I think 100 WPM is a decent target, though I think you should also be in a
   state where you can freely type and think at the same time.
6. You may also want one scripting language to help perform repetitive manual
   tasks. It could be something like Bash, but since ~I'm terrible at it and
   think~ it's a hard to use language, you can use something simpler like Python
   or node.js.

Overall, it's about being self sufficient, being able to find answers to
problems relatively quickly, and having a common set of tools that are globally
useful.
