# i forgot to unmute

Oftentimes, I observe someone making a small mistake and think to myself "that
will never be me". An example of this is when someone is talking in a video
meeting but forgets to unmute themselves - "that will never be me". But it
recently was.

It was a small meeting consisting of myself (an engineer), a product manager, a
designer, and a few others. The goal was to go over a new feature that I had
just finished implementing last year, and make sure everyone was familiar with
the ins and outs. We started out with the usual chit-chat; "how are you", "how
was the break", "good and yours", "blah blah", and so on and got into the actual
purpose of the meeting. I shared my screen and asked the usual "can everyone see
my screen" (I'll never forget to share my screen when I'm supposed to fingers
crossed) and started.

The content of the presentation isn't important here, but what happened is that
I got through the entire thing until the end, where I waited for questions or
requests and that's when I heard someone asking if I was looking for something,
and that's when I realized I was muted for the entire presentation. Then I
unmuted and gave the entire presentation again after we laughed about what just
happened.

In my defense, the demo required a lot of screen real estate as it required
having multiple user instances running in parallel, and I only use the
14-inch(?) built-in screen of my company provided laptop, so I ended up dragging
the video conference software window offscreen to save space which led me to not
see the muted icon on it and that's also possibly when I clicked the microphone
icon which muted me. Or a hotkey did it when I was setting things up. Who knows?

Why did I write about this? I guess it's because it's a lesson to not judge
people by a single small, common occurrence since I'll likely do the same in the
future. I don't think I've done it for a while though - judge or make the
mistake I've been trying to avoid - so I found this event entertaining.
