# high performance computing class 1

One of the classes I'm taking this semester is one on high performance
computing. So far, the concepts covered have been a mix of two classes I took
during undergrad - computer architecture and operating systems.

From computer architecture, topics being covered include

- processor design
- memory hierarchy/caching

And from operating systems there are topics like

- threads/processes
- virtual/physical memory and paging

While I do remember most of the high level details from undergrad, the graduate
course is more focused on performance implications along with a good heap of
historical information. For example, instead of knowing about the memory
hierarchy and its components, we specifically go into measuring performance of
sample code by hand based on cache hits/misses, clock cycles per instruction,
and so on. We also cover the evolution of chip/processor design including things
like why frequency has stalled (too much heat) and so on.

Newer topics that I'm remotely familiar with but were not covered during
undergrad:

- tiling
- vectorization
- loop unrolling

Tiling is something I'm familiar with because I've seen the matrix
multiplication optimization example before, though I'm not sure from where. I've
read about vectorization because I've looked up SIMD before, and similarly for
loop unrolling.

We're now going into specific profiling tools and techniques, like the obvious
use timers, `time`, and `gprof`. We're also covering libraries for basic
parallel programming like OpenMP.

Do I think the class has been worth it so far? Yes, as a forward looking
statement. While the topics covered so far are things I'm somewhat familiar
with, having some guidance on what to cover makes things a lot more streamlined
for learning. Furthermore, based on the syllabus, nearly everything in the
second half of the semester will be new. There are also resources for filling in
whatever gaps of knowledge, like asking the professor, and there are exams which
help with making sure I actually understand the topics.

Also access to a high performance computing cluster.
