# debugging a git push 422 response

If you're receiving a 422 response when interacting with the remote repository
AND you are not messing with large files:

1. Check what version of `git` you're using
2. If using an old version, check the requests being made with
   `GIT_CURL_VERBOSE=1 git push`
3. If any redirects are being made, change your remote url to what the redirect
   is OR use an updated version of `git`.

We're wrapping up our first project in grad school and someone shared that they
were having trouble using `git` on the remote server when pushing. They were
receiving the error:

```sh
Counting objects: 14, done.
Delta compression using up to 16 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (11/11), done.
Writing objects: 100% (12/12), 1.16 KiB | 0 bytes/s, done.
Total 12 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
error: RPC failed; result=22, HTTP code = 422
fatal: The remote end hung up unexpectedly
Everything up-to-date
```

and shared this on the class forum. This is not one of the usual errors that
occur when using `git` so it took a little bit of effort to find the issue. The
first thing I asked was for them to try
`GIT_CURL_VERBOSE=1 GIT_TRACE=1 git push` for more info, and to share the
redacted output. I compared it with the output of my command, which worked, and
noticed a difference in output

```diff
+ git remote-https origin https://domain/user/repo
- git remote-https origin https://domain/user/repo.git
```

They were missing the ".git" suffix on their url. Is this an issue? Not
necessarily because the logs showed redirects which should have allowed `git` to
push to the "proper" url.

```sh
< HTTP/1.1 301 Moved Permanently
< Location: https://domain/user/repo.git/info/refs?service=git-receive-pack
```

However, when I updated my own remote url with `git remote set-url`, I was able
to reproduce the issue. At this point I shared the workaround of updating the
remote url to include ".git" and that worked for them.

But then I wondered how did their remote get set to the url without ".git"
initially - it suggests that they were able to clone without that suffix, which
should have resulted in the same 422 response. I then tried various operations
locally using a remote url without the ".git" suffix and they worked without
issue.

I eventually realized that the ~default~ `git` binary on the server was
`1.8.3.1` while my local version was a much more recent `2.38.1.windows.1`, so I
went out and installed a version I could find that was around the server's:
`1.8.4`. Unfortunately when trying to clone something with this version, I ran
into the error

```sh
error:1407742E:SSL routines:SSL23_GET_SERVER_HELLO:tlsv1 alert protocol version
```

which I was able to get around by rebuilding with an updated version of curl,
and the issue was reproduced. So it looks like trying to use redirects was an
issue in older versions of `git`. This still doesn't answer the question of how
they cloned the repository without the ".git" suffix on the server, but after
looking over the project setup instructions, I realized there was a way to load
a newer `git` binary (version 2.19.0).

So I believe what happened was:

1. SSH into server
2. Follow instructions, load git 2.19.0 and clone without ".git" suffix
3. Time passes
4. SSH into server again
5. Forget to load git 2.19.0 and push, resulting in the error

And what do you know, on the weekend of the deadline, several other students
shared similar issues and the `git remote set-url` solution solved their
problems, too. I also shared that loading the updated `git` binary should also
solve the issue.
