# grad school semester 1 midpoint

I took some midterms over the past few weeks so I thought it would be a good
time to write about what I think of grad school so far.

The short answer is that I have mixed feelings.

The good part is that it's something to keep me busy, and some of the classes
have good content in my opinion.

The not so good:

1. I think some of the classes have been adapted to a remote learning style,
   which means it's less of a "class" and more like individual learning -
   sometimes the professors do not even seem to exist since a lot of things are
   more or less automated.
2. Some of the content is outdated, perhaps because it hasn't been updated since
   it was automated. For example, the high performance computing class discussed
   exascale computing like it hasn't been reached yet, though it has been since
   at least 2022.
3. The classes are less discussion based than I'd like - I was always under the
   assumption that higher level classes start transitioning from learning to
   research, or from answering to investigating questions. This does not seem to
   be the case so far in general (I'd even argue that the content is less open
   ended than what I experienced in undergrad). A lot of the content is not in
   depth enough for me to justify adding something to [puzzles](/puzzles)

And the rant:

Some of the other graduate students, in my opinion and based on what qualities I
think a graduate student should have, are not really fit for graduate studies.
And this is where my gatekeeping rant starts:

One of the things that (I assume) the transition to a remote learning style
added is discussion forums, kind of. During the midterm period, someone publicly
posted a question and their answer to this forum. I don't know how this could be
interpreted as acceptable, but it happened.

Another thing is that we had a project that lasted 3 or so weeks. On the day of
the deadline, several people say they want an extension because they work full
time and would like more time to complete it. Barring the fact that I think two
or so days would be enough to complete the project, I despise how the deadline
extension was asked for on the deadline. This seems like a mix of
procrastination and/or poor planning.

The forums... one class has extra credit tied to points rewarded on the forums,
and points get rewarded for posting anything (in addition to other activities).
The general format of the forum is Q&A style, and each question has many, many
answers thanks to those people looking to obtain the extra credit. Instead of
having one upvoted answer to refer to for a question, there are like 10
responses that say kind of the same thing and none of them stand out.

Because of this, and possibly more, I can see why people might devalue a
graduate degree. Of course, I've already spent a chunk of money and do enjoy
most of the content, outdated or not, so I'll see it through to the end (sunk
cost fallacy?). And for the degree.

So yeah, it's a mixed bag.
