# arguing against pre-complicating a project

At work, we started planning a decently sized project where we pull information
from all of our services to calculate a daily overall score for users to see.

Over the past 2 or 3 days, I've been saying that we shouldn't make things so
complex before we know how these queries would perform, but every single day it
seems like they forget what I've said and propose a new cache for a new
location.

The first day, we discussed numerous queries that would be hitting our
Elasticsearch cluster which doesn't have the best performance. I found it
reasonable to break up the several day period into several day long queries
whose results were cached in a database by a job on an interval.

The next day they wanted a table in the service aggregating the information
from all the other services and a job to populate that table. Caching here
seemed reasonable to me, but the table seemed unnecessary since the information
would only be needed for a day based on current requirements. I suggested to
instead use an in-memory cache which is populated when the information is first
requested. I'm not certain what the final decision there was.

The next day they then wanted to add a cache to each individual service and a
job to calculate the service specific information, which would then be pulled by
the aggregating service. This seemed excessive because for the other services,
the information boiled down to basic aggregation sql queries - counting how many
things fell under a certain condition mainly. I said that we should see how the
simple logic performed first before adding caching and jobs to pre-calculate the
information. They don't seem to understand my point and keep pushing for this
approach.

I think I'm taking the more sensible path, even if the complex logic is
eventually needed. Currently nothing suggests it is, and we'll have to see how
it works to know if it needs optimization.

Anyways, that ~~argument~~ discussion has made me really tired this week. If I
ever get an interview question for "name a time you had a disagreement with a
colleague", I finally have something to use, though the outcome and results are
currently unclear.
