# another game project

I spent the last 2 months working on a multiplayer game, and I think it's been a
pretty successful project. It's been live for 1 month and I thought it would be
interesting to discuss the changes to game mechanics and balance that I made so
far.

The premise is that a city is locked down and criminals are freely committing
crimes while cops try to stop them... with guns.

Locations to do crimes at spawn randomly around the area and consist of the
following activities:

1. Wait in place
2. Wait in place while making a ruckus
3. Wait in place (requires multiple players)
4. Go from point A to point B

The reward for each crime depends on the activity, and when a crime is
committed, there is a chance for the criminal's position to be temporarily
revealed, allowing cops to encounter and chase after them more easily.

Once criminals have exceeded a predefined threshold, all of their positions will
be revealed and after some delay holes start appearing in the lockdown border
allowing them to escape.

This was the first iteration of the game and it was pretty well received, though
there were a lot of issues, mainly around balance.

A very big issue was related to the reward quota scaling, which was a multiple
of the number of criminals. If too many criminals died early or without doing
their fair share, then the few remaining criminals could not complete enough
crimes to reach the escape phase. In fact, I don't think many games ever reached
the escape phase of the game. Instead of making changes to how efficiently cops
could chase or kill criminals, I created a new high value job that would spawn
at a criminals death, allowing for others to make up for their lack of
contribution.

That (and random bug fixes) was the main change in the next update. It
definitely had the desired effect, as the quota was reached much more often,
advancing the game to the escape phase.

The game was getting popular and had around 30 people in a match but also had
upwards of 70. This was not a scale I anticipated, but the game went smoothly
though not with an ideal player experience.

I realized that some scaling numbers, like the total amount of available crime
locations at one time, should be hard capped because there were only around 500
set up, and the location was really too small to reveal more than 100 without it
feeling cramped. I ended up capping that number among others.

A new issue was that cops would underperform easily in games. Arguably the
funnest part of this game is being a criminal in a chase, but teams are picked
randomly. Sometimes a cop would leave, which meant there would be less cops,
less chases, and less fun. However, despite chases being low in number, they
were also typically lethal - an average cop could kill an average criminal in
one or two chases. I ended up doing a few things to handle this:

1. Players can choose if they want to be considered for the police team at the
   start of the match
2. Increased the ratio of cops to criminals
3. Lowered the damage of police weapons
4. Cops get upgraded weapons in the escape phase

Overall, this meant that chases were more frequent but less lethal in the crime
phase, while the escape phase became a slaughter-fest, which was great, as the
escape phase really only lasts for a minute at most.

Another issue was related to dying early, as there are no respawns. This would
leave a player stuck in spectator mode until the end of the match, which is
quite boring. I decided to write a workaround where they can respawn as a
civilian and freely walk around to do random unrelated activities or help spot
criminals. It's really a novelty rather than an actual solution, but I thought
it would be fun enough to work.

Those changes (and more bugfixes) made up the next update, and everything seems
to be going as planned. Except for the civilian part. Civilians seem to be more
interested in stalking police, and police seem more interested in shooting
civilians for some reason. It's an interesting dynamic but I don't necessarily
mind it.

The main problems I'm thinking of handling now are:

1. Handling the scenario where few criminals are left, and the quota is
   basically unreachable despite the new jobs
2. Most of the jobs are boring activities (wait in a spot)

There are some pretty simple solutions for the first one, like automatically
starting the escape phase, but that may possibly promote hiding. The second is
more difficult as the mechanics I can implement are constrained by the system
the game is built on.
