# first time aws user experience

A few weeks back, I decided to go through [an aws tutorial](https://aws.amazon.com/getting-started/hands-on/build-modern-app-fargate-lambda-dynamodb-python/).
It didn't really explain much, and most of it was copying text from one place to
another, so I ended up stopping around the 3rd stage. I'm a cheap person so I didn't
want to get charged much so I ended up stopping what I thought were all the services.

Fast forward a week, I find out I have a $15 charge for last month, so first things
first, I got back to google and looked for ways to stop all services on aws.

## stopping services (hopefully)

The first result was [this post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/17528559/aws-how-to-disable-all-services)
that I found on StackOverflow. The accepted answer ended up not being very helpful.

> You can close your entire account in AWS Billing: [https://console.aws.amazon.com/billing/home?#/account](https://console.aws.amazon.com/billing/home?#/account)

It is important to note that even if you do close your account, you [may still have
to pay for things](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/close-aws-account/)

> If you purchased any subscriptions with ongoing payment commitments, such as Amazon
> Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) Reserved Instances (RIs) and Savings Plans,
> you are charged for these subscriptions until the plan term ends even after you
> close your account.

And it is also suggested to go to the EC2 console and stop things. The problem with
this approach is that not everything is listed there and to stop services, you have
to jump through multiple hoops to find and cancel its dependents/dependencies first.

The proper approach to canceling services is hinted at in the second most upvoted
answer, but fails to deliver details - ending with

> The rest is straightforward from here

### actually stopping services

So the first thing to do is to head to the [billing page](https://console.aws.amazon.com/billing/home)
and find what you are being billed for. Now keep track of the region and name of
the service in my case it was `US East (Ohio) Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud NatGateway`.

I then searched for `nat gateway` and it brought me to the VPC dashboard. Oh, here
is the location of other services. And then I was able to cancel them, but not before
accruing another $5 charge for this month.

So all in all, I was charged $20 for failing to stop the services properly.

## contacting support

Again, I'm a pretty cheap person so I thought I might as well try to file a support
ticket to make sure I've cancelled everything I could get charged for in addition
to asking for a refund - noting that the tutorial claimed that the cost to complete
is a lot lower than expected.

> Many of the services used are included in the AWS Free Tier. For those that are
> not, the sample application will cost, in total, less than $1/day.

I ended up asking 3 questions

1. Do I have anything else running that I am getting charged for right now?
2. Is there a way to get a refund on my current charges? (last month, start of this
   month is already $5)
3. Is there a way to know when I start a service that will charge me without waiting
   for it to show up on the billing page?

I'm not sure what I was expecting but the support was terrific (well, my only experience
going through support was mainly for f2p games, where it takes weeks to get a human
response, if at all. Nexon give me my Maplestory account back btw).

In two business days, support was able to confirm I had cancelled everything in addition
to refunding me $15.17 in addition to receiving $7 of credit. Furthermore, I was
provided with a lot of links that could help with avoiding unnecessary charges.

- [https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonECS/latest/developerguide/update-service.html](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonECS/latest/developerguide/update-service.html)
  - This is a better way to find and manage services compared to what was provided
    in the StackOverflow thread
- [https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonCloudWatch/latest/monitoring/monitor_estimated_charges_with_cloudwatch.html](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonCloudWatch/latest/monitoring/monitor_estimated_charges_with_cloudwatch.html)
  - Monitoring (estimated) charges with billing alarms
- [https://docs.aws.amazon.com/awsaccountbilling/latest/aboutv2/budgets-managing-costs.html](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/awsaccountbilling/latest/aboutv2/budgets-managing-costs.html)
  - Create budgets (granted this seems to cost money in of itself...)

## where did the NAT gateway come from

I did only run through that one tutorial so I'm wondering where the NAT gateway
came from. When I look at the billing for last month, I was charged for 0.653 GB
of data which was processed by the NAT gateway (\$0.03) and 296.000 Hrs (\$13.32).
The interesting thing here is that I made my aws account 6 days before the end of
the month - and I remember actually creating two, which means somehow I made two
by going through the tutorial.

Specifically, it seemed to be on stage 2, we can see that under Services Used, it
lists Amazon Virtual Private Cloud (VPC).

I can see on step 1 is where it actually created the two NAT gateways based on the
[setup file](https://github.com/aws-samples/aws-modern-application-workshop/blob/python/module-2/cfn/core.yml).
In fact, the tutorial literally says:

> Two NAT Gateways (one for each public subnet) - allows the containers we will
> eventually deploy into our private subnets to communicate out to the Internet
> to download necessary packages, etc.

And that by itself is \$2.16 (\$0.045 \* 24 * 2) a day.
