# underplanning and underestimating

I made a several mistakes with my current project.

## underplanning

So far, I've spent all of the time on writing the mp3 decompressor. That happens
to be the part with the least importance (in terms of what I'm trying to do), but
blocks the rest of the project since I need to be able to convert all audios' binary
data into some common standard like IR for compilers.

I didn't use much, if any, time for planning. I immediately thought of doing
audio -> common format -> test fingerprinting algorithms -> compare results.

I jumped straight to mp3 because it is a very common audio format and I didn't think
much of it. But it was actually perfectly valid to work with easier to parse files.

## underestimating

What I did think of mp3 was that it would be simple enough to decode, especially
since I've handled various binary file formats before. This kind of is the case,
but the lack of access to the formal documentation forces me to look for other sources
which unfortunately lack the detail I'm looking for.

Take for example, [this post](http://blog.bjrn.se/2008/10/lets-build-mp3-decoder.html).
When I looked at the screenshot, nowhere in the post did it mention how it was determined
where the grey block came from (first 9 bits of side information are interpreted
as 9 bit number which is an offset from the frame header/side data bytes where the
main data starts).

And there are some leaps in logic that I do not fully get like

> The perceptive reader may notice the gray main data bytes in the image above
> begin with an interesting pattern (3E 50 00 00…) that resembles the first bytes
> of the main data in the next logical frame (38 40 00 00…).

I'm not fully sure how this can be considered a pattern at a glance. And even worse,
skips over details.

> For now let’s pretend we have decoded the main data completely, including the
> Huffman coded data.

It says for now, but never really goes into details on decoding the main data, or
even how to get the main data.

Admittedly, the post is about a project and the source can be found [here](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/mp3decoder-0.0.1/src/)
but, in my opinion, it is bad to leave out details and just point to a general
area in your code and say that the logic is somewhere around here. It is so much
more useful if you can include the exact details, functions, and/or lines within
the post itself.

Although it's possible the author wrote the blog with a different point in mind while
I'm trying to rely on it like a technical reference.

## where now

I've still been working on the mp3 decoder - mainly refactoring and subbing in a
bitstream reader to simplify things, but again, the lack of details that seem to
only be found in code makes this difficult.

I think it would be valuable to go through and put together a detailed page on how
it works in case anyone in the future is in my position. However, as I mentioned
earlier, parsing mp3s is a very small (but kind of necessary) part of the project.

It could be simpler to use wav files which, in general, contain uncompressed audio.
This makes transforming them for processing a lot easier. [This page](http://soundfile.sapp.org/doc/WaveFormat/)
looks quite thorough at a glance, although short - that could be because the format
is simple to work with.

I've decided to double down on figuring out the mp3 though; hopefully by the time
I finish, I'll still have interest in trying to fingerprint them.

## random aside

I think it's interesting how this project ended up touching Haskell (through the
person's blog post project) and Huffman coding (which is used in mp3s) as those are
topics that I've written about in the past. Also I read that mp3s split up the coding
and use 2+ codebooks to achieve better compression ratios - which might be an example
of how grouping similar data for encoding can benefit compression.
