# what is an acceptable amount of tech debt

This is a thought that has been crossing my mind a lot recently. Supposedly the project
I'm working on is slated as the company's next big thing but there just seems to
be so much technical debt on the project that if we keep our focus on features
and not remediation, then the entire thing will just fall apart - this is a case
that I've voiced again and again.

## existences

### a lack of documentation

The thing is with this project is that it was actually acquired from another company,
and since then, most of the original developers and even a few product managers have
moved on.

There are so many parts that no one has any knowledge about and looking at the code
is painful (that's for another section). When bugs show up in these areas of the
product, it takes a massive amount of manpower to get it resolved.

Recently, I discovered one of the documents that was provided for the acquisition
was a test plan which is what QA used to put together test cases. But even then,
certain cases most likely never worked after looking at the code.

It really makes me wonder if having someone look at the code is actually part of
the acquisition process, or the company just valued the actual product so highly
it didn't matter.

### a lack of code quality

This could just be me being overconfident or an ass, but the code quality is just
so poor. This probably has to do with the fact that it used to be a startup so
the previous developers just went all out in getting features out the door and securing
clients with no thought to code quality.

Well also this compounded because after the handoff, the easy paths were taken in
fixing and implementing features which leads to more debt.

And the largest issue which requires some explanation:

1. The code used to be es5 (javascript) for compatibility reasons
2. Around a year ago, there was an initiative to do a rewrite to typescript
3. This was not a real rewrite, but actually ended up being an automatic translation
   from one javascript to typescript using stuff like acorn.
4. This resulted in working typescript code, but the quality is just down the drain.
5. Also there are bugs in the translation that pop up every now and then.

### almost no standards

Honestly, the developers here are more concerned about stuff like variable casing
and naming conventions instead of things like the actual logical flow and structure
of the code.

People will suggest factoring out a simple condition into its own method during
code reviews. Stuff like this

```javascript
function isPerson(thing) {
    return thing === 'person';
}
if (isPerson(a))
```

I mean this does make sense sometimes but the conditions where this irked me were
the simplest ones.

Meanwhile there is a glaring logical error in another place that everyone overlooks.
Haha, actually one recent pr I had tackled the bug where the crux of the problem
fell on one variable like this

```javascript
const working = false; // should be true
```

And no one even noticed. Well fortunately I tested it one last time before deploying
and we have QA who would've caught it.

### a lack of technical expertise

This is something that really gets me. I had brought up passing functions which
then get stringified, passed to another process, and evaled on that process as a
possible hack to get around something we wanted to do.

And then this guy asks if passing functions is a thing - despite the fact that
he has used callbacks a ton of times. Like what do you think you are doing there
all of those times? Also the fact that a lot of the callbacks aren't done with
lambdas when they aren't used anywhere else.

```javascript
function callback() { }
request(url, callback); // compared to request(url, () => { })
```

Note that this is different from knowing more up to date language features. For example
I was fine when someone thought this would do `xargs([1, 2, 3]);`

```javascript
const args = [1, 2, 3];
xargs(...args);
```

Sure spread/rest is kind of newer but passing functions? No.

### barriers to parallel development

A non-insubstantial part of the project is set up, not through code, but rather through
various configuration options. The main problem with this is that there is we currently
do not have a proper way to resolve conflicts, similar to what vcs systems might
do - we either take a or b and cannot pick some intermediary between the two versions.

This has led to certain fixes or features inadvertently getting overwritten by people
who aren't paying attention. Actually, this also happens with code, too... the
general idea is that you upload your diff to a server and commit the changes and
face the a or b resolution.

The only way to get the intermediary version is to create a new diff based on the
code in the main branch. Of course, this is only going to happen after your code
is merged, and as pointed out previously, this will only apply to code and not
configuration.

Yes, we do have something in the backlog for setting this stuff up but who knows
if it will make it into a sprint.

### constantly evolving definitions of new features

The last feature for this project was literally being defined as development was
being done. There were days where I would run into an ambiguous case and would have
to wait for the product manager to talk to the client and get back.

Also the funny thing is that this project was on a tight deadline.

## closing

Honestly just wanted to vent.
