<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->

## Question 1

<p>
Pebbling a checkerboard. We are given a checkerboard which has $4$ rows and $n$ columns,
and has an integer written in each square. We are also given a set of $2n$ pebbles,
and we want to place some or all of these on the checkerboard (each pebble can be
placed on exactly one square) so as to maximize the sum of the integers in the squares
that are covered by pebbles. There is one constraint: for a placement of pebbles
to be legal, no two of them can be on horizontally or vertically adjacent squares
(diagonal adjacency is fine).
<br />
<br />
(a) Determine the number of legal patterns that can occur in any column (in isolation,
ignoring the pebbles in adjacent columns) and describe these patterns.
<br />
<br />
Pretend the column is a 0-indexed array with length 4. We can place pebbles at the
following indices:
$$
[[0, 3], [0, 2], [1, 3], [0], [1], [2], [3], []]
$$
Call two patterns compatible if they can be placed on adjacent columns to form a
legal placement. Let us consider subproblems consisting of the first $k$ columns
$1 \leq k \leq n$. Each subproblem can be assigned a type, which is the pattern occurring
in the last column.
<br />
<br />
A couple of observations to make would be:
</p>

1. There are $2n$ pebbles. Because we know that we can put at most $2$ pebbles
   in each column, we will be able to use any combintion of patterns without
   running out of pebbles.
2. It may be correct to use 1 or 0 pebbles in a column because the column may
   contain negative values. Will taking a negative value open up an avenue for
   taking a positive value that outweighs the cost? I'm not entirely sure but
   this doesn't appear to be the case at a glance.

<p>
(b) Using the notions of compatibility and type, give an $O(n)$-time dynamic programming
algorithm for computing an optimal placement
<br />
<br />
Start by defining a function $f(n, t)$ that expresses the max value that can be obtained
for columns $1...n$ by using pattern $t$ on the last column. We can express the function
in terms of itself by saying the maximum value for columns $1..n$ and pattern $t$
is the sum of the maximum value for columns $1...n-1$ and the value of applying
pattern $t$ to column $n$. We also need the constraint that the pattern for $n-1$
is compatible with $t$. In other words
$$
\begin{align}
  f(0, t) &= 0 \\
  f(n, t) &= \max \{ f(n - 1, t') + val(C_n, t) \mid t' \in compat(t) \}
\end{align}
$$
Let's try an example:
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
  2 & 2 & -5 & 2 & -3 \\
  -4 & 1 & 2 & 2 & -1 \\
  -1 & 0 & 0 & 3 & -4 \\
  1 & -1 & 3 & -1 & -2
\end{bmatrix}
$$
We start with a 2d table, with lengths $N$ and $T$. $T$ is the number of types:
8. We'll label them by their index in the first array we constructed for this problem,
and fill out $f(0, t)$, and $f(1, t)$ which is straightforward since we do not need
to think about compatibility.
</p>

| n\t | 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   | 4   | 5   | 6   | 7   |
| :-: | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  0  | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   | 0   |
|  1  | 3   | 1   | -3  | 2   | -4  | -1  | 1   | 0   |
|  2  | ?   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
| ... |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |

<p>
What is $f(2, 0)$? According to our recurrence, it is
$$
\begin{align}
  f(2, 0) &= \max \{ f(1, t') + val(C_2, 0) \mid t' \in compat(0) \} \\
  &= \max \{ f(1, t') + 1 \mid t' \in \{ 1, 3, 4, 7 \} \} \\
  &= \max \{ f(1, 1), f(1, 3), f(1, 4), f(1, 7) \} + 1 \\
  &= 3
\end{align}
$$
The we fill out the table and look for the maximum in the last row for the solution.
</p>

| n\t | 0    | 1   | 2    | 3    | 4    | 5    | 6    | 7    |
| :-: | ---- | --- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
|  0  | 0    | 0   | 0    | 0    | 0    | 0    | 0    | 0    |
|  1  | 3    | 1   | -3   | 2    | -4   | -1   | 1    | 0    |
|  2  | 3+1  | 1+2 | 2+0  | 1+2  | 3+1  | 3+0  | 2-1  | 3+0  |
|  3  | 4-2  | 4-5 | 3+5  | 4-5  | 4+2  | 4+0  | 4+3  | 4+0  |
|  4  | 6+1  | 8+5 | 4+1  | 8+2  | 7+2  | 8+3  | 6-1  | 8+0  |
|  5  | 11-5 | 9-7 | 13-3 | 11-3 | 13-1 | 10-4 | 13-2 | 13+0 |

I did not check if the table is correct, but we can check if the answer we have
is at least valid. We see the max score, 13, is obtained pattern 7, on the last
column and work our way backwards. The underlined numbers are the ones chosen.

<p>
$$
\begin{bmatrix}
  2              & \underline{2}  & -5            & \underline{2} & -3 \\
  -4             & 1              & \underline{2} & 2             & -1 \\
  -1             & 0              & 0             & \underline{3} & -4 \\
  \underline{1}  & -1             & \underline{3} & -1            & -2
\end{bmatrix}
$$
Note that on the second column you can either use pattern 1 or 3, then on the first
column you can use 1 or 6.
</p>

## Question 2

<p>
Let us define a multiplication operation on three symbols $a$, $b$, $c$ according
to the following table; thus $ab = b$, $ba = c$, and so on. Notice that the multiplication
operation defined by the table is neither associative nor commutative.
</p>

| \\  | a   | b   | c   |
| :-: | --- | --- | --- |
|  a  | b   | b   | a   |
|  b  | c   | b   | a   |
|  c  | a   | c   | c   |

<p>
Find an efficient algorithm that examines a string of these symbols, say $bbbbac$,
and decides whether or not it is possible to parenthesize the string in such a way
that the value of the resulting expression is $a$. For example, on input $bbbbac$
your algorithm should return yes because $((b(bb))(ba))c = a$.
<br />
<br />
For this question, we can first note that the we will not be able to define the problem
in the $f(n) = f(n - 1)$ kind of way due to the nature of how parenthesization works,
namely that it doesn't have to end up like $(((a_1)a_2)a_3)$. This most likely requires
a tree like approach.
<br />
<br />
Start by defining $f(i, j)$ which determines whether or not the substring starting
at $a_i$ and ending at $a_j$ equals $a$.
<br />
<br />
For an expression $a_i, a_{i+1}, ..., a_j$, it is reducible to $a$ if there is some
$k \in [i...j]$ where $a_i, ..., a_k$ and $a_{k + 1}, ... a_j$ are reducible to $a$.
$$
\begin{align}
  f(i, j) &= \max \{ f(i, k)*f(k + 1, j) \mid i \leq k \lt j \}
\end{align}
$$
I think the weird part with questions like this is determining the actual base cases.
If I go with $f(i, i)$ and say it starts at $a_i$ and includes $a_i$, then it is
straightforward whether or not a single symbol is $a$ or not. However, if I go one
level higher - $f(i, i + 1)$ which could be decomposed into $f(i, i)$ and
$f(i + 1, i + 1)$, but even if $f(i, i)$ is false, $f(i, i)*f(i + 1, i + 1)$ may
not be, depending on the table.
<br />
<br />
One alternative is to say $f(i, i)$ starts at $a_i$ but does not include $a_i$.
In other words it is empty. This is trivially 0 (false). But then if we have
$f(i, i + 1)$ be the symbol $a$, we would then decompose it to $f(i, i)*f(i+1, i+1)$
which is 2 falses.
<br />
<br />
We end up needing a third argument here. The tree might look like this:
<br />
<br />
<script type="text/tikz">
  \begin{tikzpicture}[nodes={draw, circle, minimum size=0.75cm}, ->]
    \node {x}
      child{ node {y} edge from parent node[left, draw=none] {}}
      child{ node {z} edge from parent node[right, draw=none] {}};
  \end{tikzpicture}
</script>
<br />
<br />
If $x$ is the root, we need to determine if $x$ can be $a$. To do this, we need
to know possible values for $y$ and $z$. If we go deeper, we can get a subtree rooted
at $y$.
<br />
<br />
<script type="text/tikz">
  \begin{tikzpicture}[nodes={draw, circle, minimum size=0.75cm}, ->]
    \node {x}
      child{ node {y}
          child{ node {m} edge from parent node[left, draw=none] {}}
          child{ node {n} edge from parent node[right, draw=none] {}}
          edge from parent node[left, draw=none] {}
      }
      child{ node {z} edge from parent node[right, draw=none] {}};
  \end{tikzpicture}
</script>
<br />
<br />
At this point, $y$ does not necessarily have to be $a$, as it could be any value
as long as the combination of $y$ and $x$ can make $a$. This means the combination
of $(mn)x$ should equal $a$. So in addition to having $i$ and $j$, we need another
$s$ which determines what are the valid symbols that can be at that position. So
we define $f(s, i, j)$ to be if the symbol $s$ can be created from $a_i$ to $a_j$,
inclusive.
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD013 -->
$$
\begin{align}
  f(s, i, i) &= a_i == s \\
  f(s, i, j) &= s \in \{ m * n \mid n, m \in \{ a, b, c \}, \exists k \in [i, j) \text{ st } f(m, i, k) \text{ and } f(n, k + 1, j) \}
\end{align}
$$
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD013 -->
Long story short, $f(s, i, j)$ is true if $s$ can be made from the children's possibilities.
My guess is that we will be calculating the set of possibilities until we reach
the root, namely $f(_, 0, len)$ at which point we run $f(a, 0, len)$ for the answer.
<br />
<br />
But finally to the example - we keep track of the set of possiblities for parenthesizing
$a_i$ to $a_j$
</p>

| i\j | 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   | 4   | 5   |
| :-: | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  0  | (b) |     |     |     |     |     |
|  1  |     | (b) |     |     |     |     |
|  2  |     |     | (b) |     |     |     |
|  3  |     |     |     | (b) |     |     |
|  4  |     |     |     |     | (a) |     |
|  5  |     |     |     |     |     | (c) |

<p>
Let's run a simple example $f(_, 0, 1)$ for all symbols:
$$
\begin{align}
  f(a, 0, 1) &= a \in \{ (b * b) \} = false \\
  f(b, 0, 1) &= b \in \{ (b * b) \} = true \\
  f(c, 0, 1) &= c \in \{ (b * b) \} = false \\
\end{align}
$$
So $f(_, 0, 1) = (b)$. Fill out the rest to get this:
</p>

| i\j | 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   | 4   | 5   |
| :-: | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  0  | (b) | (b) |     |     |     |     |
|  1  |     | (b) | (b) |     |     |     |
|  2  |     |     | (b) | (b) |     |     |
|  3  |     |     |     | (b) | (c) |     |
|  4  |     |     |     |     | (a) | (a) |
|  5  |     |     |     |     |     | (c) |

<p>
Things get more complex on the next level. $f(a, 0, 2)$. We won't follow the formula
directly, but we will work around it.
$$
\begin{align}
  &(n, f(n, k + 1, 2)) \forall k \in [0, 2), n \in \{ a, b, c \} \\
  &k = 0, &n = a &\implies &(a, f(a, 1, 2)) &\implies &(a, false) \\
  &       &n = b &\implies &(b, f(b, 1, 2)) &\implies &(b, true) \\
  &       &n = c &\implies &(c, f(c, 1, 2)) &\implies &(c, false) \\
  &k = 1, &n = a &\implies &(a, f(a, 2, 2)) &\implies &(a, false) \\
  &       &n = b &\implies &(b, f(b, 2, 2)) &\implies &(b, true) \\
  &       &n = c &\implies &(c, f(c, 2, 2)) &\implies &(c, false) \\
  &(m, f(m, 0, k)) \forall k \in [0, 2), m \in \{ a, b, c \} \\
  &k = 0, &m = a &\implies &(a, f(a, 0, 0)) &\implies &(a, false) \\
  &       &m = b &\implies &(b, f(b, 0, 0)) &\implies &(b, true) \\
  &       &m = c &\implies &(c, f(c, 0, 0)) &\implies &(c, false) \\
  &k = 1, &m = a &\implies &(a, f(a, 0, 1)) &\implies &(a, false) \\
  &       &m = b &\implies &(b, f(b, 0, 1)) &\implies &(b, true) \\
  &       &m = c &\implies &(c, f(c, 0, 1)) &\implies &(c, false) \\
\end{align}
$$
We get $n \in \{b\}$ and $m \in \{b\}$. Multiplying each element of the sets together
gives us $b$, therefore we can only obtain $b$ at this position. Let's try $f(a,
2, 4)$ and $f(c, 2, 4)$ as they are the more interesting ones.
$$
\begin{align}
  &(n, f(n, k + 1, 4)) \forall k \in [2, 4), n \in \{ a, b, c \} \\
  &k = 2, &n = a &\implies &(a, f(a, 3, 4)) &\implies &(a, false) \\
  &       &n = b &\implies &(b, f(b, 3, 4)) &\implies &(b, false) \\
  &       &n = c &\implies &(c, f(c, 3, 4)) &\implies &(c, true) \\
  &k = 3, &n = a &\implies &(a, f(a, 4, 4)) &\implies &(a, true) \\
  &       &n = b &\implies &(b, f(b, 4, 4)) &\implies &(b, false) \\
  &       &n = c &\implies &(c, f(c, 4, 4)) &\implies &(c, false) \\
  &(m, f(m, 2, k)) \forall k \in [2, 4), m \in \{ a, b, c \} \\
  &k = 2, &m = a &\implies &(a, f(a, 2, 2)) &\implies &(a, false) \\
  &       &m = b &\implies &(b, f(b, 2, 2)) &\implies &(b, true) \\
  &       &m = c &\implies &(c, f(c, 2, 2)) &\implies &(c, false) \\
  &k = 3, &m = a &\implies &(a, f(a, 2, 3)) &\implies &(a, false) \\
  &       &m = b &\implies &(b, f(b, 2, 3)) &\implies &(b, true) \\
  &       &m = c &\implies &(c, f(c, 2, 3)) &\implies &(c, false) \\
\end{align}
$$
We get $n \in \{c, a\}$ and $m \in \{b\}$ - finally, something interesting.
Make sure to keep track of the order, as this multiplication is not commutative.
So we end up with $\{ m*n \mid m \in \{b\}, n \in \{c, a \} \}$. we'll go ahead and
fill out the rest of the table below.
</p>

| i\j | 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   | 4      | 5      |
| :-: | --- | --- | --- | --- | ------ | ------ |
|  0  | (b) | (b) | (b) | (b) | (a, c) | (a, c) |
|  1  |     | (b) | (b) | (b) | (a, c) | (a, c) |
|  2  |     |     | (b) | (b) | (a, c) | (a, c) |
|  3  |     |     |     | (b) | (c)    | (c)    |
|  4  |     |     |     |     | (a)    | (a)    |
|  5  |     |     |     |     |        | (c)    |

<p>
We can see that the entire string can be reduce to either $a$ or $c$. After filling
in the table a bit, I ended up defining a new function $p(i, j)$ which defines the
possibilities for the substring $a_i...a_j$ that meshes better with what the table
contains.
$$
\begin{align}
  p(i, i) &= \{a_i\} \\
  p(i, j) &= \{m * n \mid m \in p(i, k), n \in p(k + 1, j), i \leq k \lt j \} \\
  f(s, i, j) &= s \in p(i, j)
\end{align}
$$
In fact, I basically followed this simpler formula for filling out the table. It
also shows how dynamic programming optimizes builds from smaller subproblems to solve
the large one.
</p>
