<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->

## Question 1

<p>
The Chinese Remainder theorem
<br />
<br />
(a) Make a table with three columns. The first column is all numbers from 0 to 14.
The second is the residues of these numbers modulo 3; the third column is the residues
modulo 5. What do you observe?
</p>
| x   | x mod 3 | x mod 5 |
| --- | ------- | ------- |
| 0   | 0       | 0       |
| 1   | 1       | 1       |
| 2   | 2       | 2       |
| 3   | 0       | 3       |
| 4   | 1       | 4       |
| 5   | 2       | 0       |
| 6   | 0       | 1       |
| 7   | 1       | 2       |
| 8   | 2       | 3       |
| 9   | 0       | 4       |
| 10  | 1       | 0       |
| 11  | 2       | 1       |
| 12  | 0       | 2       |
| 13  | 1       | 3       |
| 14  | 2       | 4       |

Not sure what to observe here...

<p>
(b) Prove that if $p$ and $q$ are distinct primes, then for every pair $(j, k)$ with
$0 \leq j \lt p$ and $0 \leq k \lt q$, there is a unique integer $0 \leq i \lt pq$
such that $i \equiv j \text{ mod } p$ and $i \equiv k \text{ mod } q$.
<br />
<br />
So to relate this back to (a) first, the table does look like an example of this
$p = 3$ and $q = 5$. Each pair of $(x \text{ mod } 3, x \text{ mod } 5)$ is unique
and maps to a number between $0 \le i \lt pq$.
<br />
<br />
This is a hand wavey explanation that I thought of, but basically they don't need
to be distinct primes, just relatively prime. Because the result of the modulus
operator cycles from $0$ to $n-1$ repeatedly, the only time a duplicate pair would
show in the table would be at the lcm. I think. Because the lcm of two primes $p$
and $q$ is $pq$, there will be no duplicate pairs in the range $[0..pq)$. A quick
supporting example would be for $x \text{ mod } 4$ and $x \text{ mod } 6$ should
have it's first duplicate at 12, which is the lcm of 4 and 6.
<br />
<br />
Maybe will try mathematical approach later. Hope explanation is at least valid.
<!-- <br />
<br />
(c) In this one-to-one correspondence between integers and pairs, it is easy to
go from $i$ to $(j, k)$. Prove that the following formula takes you the other
way:
$$
\begin{align}
    i = {j · q · (q^{−1} \text{ mod } p) + k · p · (p^{−1} \text{ mod } q)}
    \text{ mod } pq.
\end{align}
$$
<br />
<br />
(d) Can you generalize parts (b) and (c) to more than two primes? -->
</p>
## Question 2

<p>
Alice and her three friends are all users of the RSA cryptosystem. Her friends have
public keys $(N_i, e_i = 3)$, $i = 1, 2, 3$, where as always, $N_i = p_iq_i$ for
randomly chosen n-bit primes $p_i$, $q_i$. Show that if Alice sends the same n-bit
message $M$ (encrypted using RSA) to each of her friends, then anyone who intercepts
all three encrypted messages will be able to efficiently recover $M$.
<br />
<br />
The first thing to do is recall the steps of RSA and how they work.
</p>

To generate keys:

1. Generate 2 random primes $p$ and $q$
2. Pick an $e$ that is relatively prime to $(p - 1)(q - 1)$, and let $N = pq$
3. Let the public key be $(N, e)$
4. The private key is $d = e^{-1} \text{ mod } (p - 1)(q - 1)$

For encryption/decryption:

1. Encryption: compute $y = m^e \text{ mod } N$ where $m$ is the message and $y$
   is the encrypted message
2. Decryption: compute $m = y^d \text{ mod } N$

<p>
The encrypted message $M_i$ will be $M^3 \text{ mod } N_i$ for each of her friends.
This means we can solve the system $M^3 = M_i \text{ mod } N_i$. According to chinese
remainder theorem, we can get a solution by following the steps.
$$
\begin{align}
    N &= (\prod_{i=1}^{3} N_i) \\
    a_i &= M_i \\
    y_i &= N / N_i \\
    z_i &= y_i^{-1} \text{ mod } N_i \\
    M^3 &= \sum_{i=1}^{3} a_iy_iz_i \\
\end{align}
$$
Honestly speaking, I still don't fully get the theorem so I will be revisiting this...
Thought for a couple minutes and I think I kind of get it, consider the normal formulation:
$$
\begin{align}
    x &\equiv a_1 \text{ mod } n_1 \\
    x &\equiv a_2 \text{ mod } n_2 \\
    x &\equiv a_k \text{ mod } n_k \\
\end{align}
$$
$a_iy_iz_i$ is divisible by $n_j$ if $j \neq i$ because $y_i$ includes $n_j$. This
means $(\sum_{i=1}^{k} a_iy_iz_i) \text{ mod } n_i$ turns into
$(a_iy_iz_i) \text{ mod } n_i$ which then turns into $a_i$ because $y_i$ and $z_i$
are inverses. Then we want to get a unique number so we use $\mod { N }$. Easy to
think backwards, but I wonder how the theorem was originally conceived - well that
seems to be an overarching theme in math for me.
<br />
<br />
I'll still revisit because I like to be at a place where I can derive the formulas
myself with a few insights because there is less memorization needed and that's how
I've approached all technical topics so far.
<br />
<br />
Here is one way that chinese remainder theorem might have been derived from a concrete
example. Start with the first equivalence:
$$
\begin{align}
    x &\equiv a_1 \text{ mod } n_1 \\
\end{align}
$$
A valid solution for $x$ would be $a_1$.
<br />
<br />
Now what if we want to bring in another equivalence?
$$
\begin{align}
    x &\equiv a_1 \text{ mod } n_1 \\
    x &\equiv a_2 \text{ mod } n_2 \\
\end{align}
$$
We do the same thing as before but for the second one and get $a_2$. However, we
somehow want to combine the two equations into one. We know that
$a \text{ mod } b$ has solutions of the form $bk + a$ where $k$ is anything, so why
don't we start out by trying to add them together?
$$
\begin{align}
    (a_1) + (a_2) \\
\end{align}
$$
What we want now is for all of these parenthesized groups to disappear when we do
$\text{ mod } n_i$ except for the one for that $i$. This is possible by multiplying
each group by the product of the other $n$s. But first, let's expand to three equivalences
just for show (it's not as enlightening with only two):
$$
\begin{align}
    (a_1) + (a_2) + (a_3) \\
\end{align}
$$
If I want $a_1$ to be divisible by $n_2$, multiply it by $n_2$. Same for $n_3$.
In short, multiply each group by the product of the other moduli:
$$
\begin{align}
    (n_2n_3)(a_1) + (n_1n_3)(a_2) + (n_1n_2)(a_3) \\
\end{align}
$$
Now, when we take that equation and do $\text{ mod } n_i$ ($i=1$ for example), we
end with:
$$
\begin{align}
    & (n_2n_3)(a_1) + (n_1n_3)(a_2) + (n_1n_2)(a_3) &\text{ mod } n_1 \\
    & (n_2n_3)(a_1) &\text{ mod } n_1 \\
    & (a_1n_2n_3) &\text{ mod } n_1 \\
\end{align}
$$
All the terms we didn't want fell away! (A short aside, I feel like I've seen this
"pattern" in a lot of places before when doing math stuff.)
<br />
<br />
At this point, we need to somehow get rid of $n_2n_3$. This is where we can take
advantage of the fact that the moduli are relatively prime. We know $n_2n_3$ is
relatively prime to $n_1$ because of this. Therefore, the inverse to $n_2n_3$ exists.
Which we can use to obtain $a_1$ again. This means that for each parenthesized group,
we should multiply it by the inverse of that product that we created. For example
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD013 -->
$$
\begin{align}
    ((n_2n_3)^{-1} \text{ mod } n_1)(n_2n_3)(a_1) + ((n_1n_3)^{-1} \text{ mod } n_2)(n_1n_3)(a_2) + ((n_1n_2)^{-1} \text{ mod } n_3)(n_1n_2)(a_3) \\
\end{align}
$$
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD013 -->
Look familiar? This is literally the theorem but a bit rearranged.
$$
\begin{align}
    z_1y_1a_1 + z_2y_2a_2 + z_3y_3a_3
\end{align}
$$
</p>
