<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->

## Question 1

<p>
Shortest path algorithms can be applied in currency trading. Let $c_1$, $c_2$,
..., $c_n$ be various currencies; for instance, $c_1$ might be dollars, $c_2$ pounds
and $c_3$ lire. For any two currencies $c_i$ and $c_j$, there is an exchange rate
$r_{i,j}$; this means that you can purchase $r_{i,j}$ units of currency $c_j$ in
exchange for one unit of $c_i$. These exchange rates satisfy the condition that
$r_{i,j} · r_{j,i} \lt 1$, so that if you start with a unit of currency $c_i$, change
it into currency $c_j$ and then convert back to currency $c_i$, you end up with
less than one unit of currency $c_i$ (the difference is the cost of the transaction).
<br />
<br />
(a) Give an efficient algorithm for the following problem: Given a set of exchange
rates $r_{i,j}$, and two currencies $s$ and $t$, find the most advantageous sequence
of currency exchanges for converting currency $s$ into currency $t$. Toward this
goal, you should represent the currencies and rates by a graph whose edge lengths
are real numbers.
<br />
<br />
This can be done by using a graph with vertices that represent the currencies and
edges that represent the exchange rates between currencies which we then apply a
slightly modified Dijkstra's algorithm - instead of adding the edges we multiply
them and we try to maximize instead of minimize the value.
<br />
<br />
However, it is also possible to use an unmodified version of Dijkstra's algorithm
if we modify the weights of the edges somehow. In other words, we want to find functions
$f$ and $g$ such that $f(r_1) + f(r_2) = g(r_1*r_2)$. At a high level, this looks
like we are trying to find some kind of relationship between addition and multiplication
and makes me think of expoonents because $x^a*x^b = x^{a + b}$. Is this what we want?
Not exactly because this is inversed. However, exponents have an inverse which are
logarithms and it just so happens to be the solution - $log(r_1) + log(r_2) =
log(r_1 * r_2)$. Therefore, by taking the log of all edges, we can apply Djikstra's
algorithm to find the $log$ of the best sequence of exchanges, and then use
$b ^ {log_b(r_1 * r_2)}$ to extract the actual number.
<br />
<br />
(b) The exchange rates are updated frequently, reflecting the demand and supply
of the various currencies. Occasionally the exchange rates satisfy the following
property: there is a sequence of currencies $c_{i_1}$, $c_{i_2}$, ..., c_{i_k} such
that $r_{i_1,i_2} · r_{i_2,i_3} · · · r_{i_{k−1},i_k} · r_{i_k,i_1} \gt 1$. Such
anomalies last only a fraction of a minute on the currency exchange, but they provide
an opportunity for risk-free profits. Give an efficient algorithm for detecting
the presence of such an anomaly. Use the graph representation you found above.
<br />
<br />
As a simple example, we might have a graph like
<br />
<br />
<script type="text/tikz">
  \begin{tikzpicture}[nodes={draw, circle, minimum size=0.75cm}, ->]
    \node [] (b) {$c_2$};
    \node [left of = b, node distance = 2in] (a) {$c_1$};
    \draw [->] (a) to [out=30,in=150] node [draw=none, above] {0.5} (b);
    \draw [->] (b) to [out=210,in=-30] node [draw=none, below] {3} (a);
  \end{tikzpicture}
</script>
<br />
<br />
We can convert between $c_1$ and $c_2$ and keep on making money due to this conversion.
This example shows that there is free money when there is a path from a currency
to itself where we end up with more than we started (the conversion rate is greater
than 1).
<br />
<br />
For this problem, I would choose to use the Floyd-Warshall algorithm as it determines
the shortest path between each pair of vertices and would be better than running
a shortest path from 1 to all vertices $v$ times. In this case, with the modification
for where we multiply instead of add like in part a, the diagonals of the resultant
matrix should all be less than or equal to 1. However, the existence of an advantageous
exchange would have some of those values be greater than 1.
<br />
<br />
If we went with the log representation, all of the values in our matrix should be
negative. The presence of a positive number along the diagonal would indicate free
money and the presence of 0 would indicate a neutral exchange (we end with what
we started at).
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD013 -->
$$
\begin{align}
    log_b(x) = 0                         &\implies b^{0} = x                                  &\implies x = 1 \\
    log_b(x) = n \text{ where } n \gt 0  &\implies b^{\text{n}} = x                           &\implies x \gt 1 \\
    log_b(x) = -n \text{ where } n \gt 0 &\implies b^{\text{-n}} = \frac{1}{b^{\text{n}}} = x &\implies x \lt 1 \\
\end{align}
$$
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD013 -->
</p>
